Diabetes Australia is the third oldest diabetes association in the world, after the United Kingdom and Portugal.  Originally established in the state of New South Wales (NSW) in 1937, the organisation's head office is now in the nation's capital, Canberra.  Currently a federation of ten operational organisations is overseen: five State/Territory Associations of Diabetes Australia, the Australian Diabetes Society, the Australian Diabetes Educators Association, the Kellion Diabetes Foundation and The Diabetes Research Foundation - Western Australia.
Diabetes Australia is a not-for-profit organisation supported financially by the community. In addition to its original mandate as an extended support group, Diabetes Australia raises funds to invest in research, health services, provision of self–management products and services, and public awareness programs. It also facilitates the development of national policies about diabetes.
Diabetes Australia assists the Australian Government in the administration of the National Diabetes Services Scheme.


== Statement of purpose ==
Diabetes Australia works in partnership with diabetes health professionals, educators and researchers to minimise the impact of diabetes on the Australian community. Diabetes Australia is committed to turning diabetes around through awareness, prevention, detection, management and a cure.
Diabetes Australia raises awareness about the seriousness of diabetes, promotes prevention and early detection strategies and advocates for better standards of care. Diabetes Australia is also a significant financial contributor to research into better treatments for diabetes and the search for a cure.


== Publications and research ==
Diabetes Australia is involved in two publications, one for medical specialists, and another for the broader public.
Circle is a quarterly magazine covering health and welfare issues for people with diabetes, and available through membership of Diabetes Australia including state and territory based member-organisations.  Circulation is around 140,000.
Diabetes Management Journal (DMJ) is a free magazine containing information and advice for general practitioners, endocrinologists, diabetes educators, optometrists and podiatrists, who receive it through their professional associations. Its circulation is around 40,000.
In March 2012, the organisation released a report called Diabetes: the silent pandemic and its impact on Australia.  The report highlighted the statistic that 275 Australians were diagnosed with diabetes every day and that by 2025, type 2 diabetes is predicted to triple in prevalence. The statistics from the International Diabetes Federation's 2015 Diabetes Atlas show that diabetes is on the rise. Mr Johnson, the CEO of Diabetes Australia, said that 280 people are diagnosed with the diabetes in Australia every day and Australia's health system will not cope unless more is done about prevention of the disease. 


== See also ==

Diabetes Australia Victoria
Diabetes NSW & ACT


== References ==


== External links ==
Diabetes Australia
Diabetes Queensland