Muscle atrophy is defined as a decrease in the mass of the muscle; it can be a partial or complete wasting away of muscle, and is most commonly experienced when persons suffer temporary disabling circumstances such as being restricted in movement and/or confined to bed as when hospitalized. When a muscle atrophies, this leads to muscle weakness, since the ability to exert force is related to mass. Modern medicine's understanding of the quick onset of muscle atrophy is a major factor behind the practice of getting hospitalized patients out of bed and moving about as active as possible as soon as is feasible, despite sutures, wounds, broken bones, and pain.
Muscle atrophy results from a co-morbidity of several common diseases, including cancer, AIDS, congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, renal failure, and severe burns; patients who have "cachexia" in these disease settings have a poor prognosis. Moreover, starvation eventually leads to muscle atrophy.
Disuse of the muscles, such as when muscle tissue is immobilized for even a few days – when the patient has a primary injury such as an immobilized broken bone (set in a cast or immobilized in traction), for example – also leads rapidly to disuse atrophy.  Minimizing such occurrences as soon as possible is a primary mission of occupational and physical therapists employed within hospitals working in co-ordination with orthopedic surgeons.
Neurogenic atrophy, which has a similar effect, is muscle atrophy resulting from damage to the nerve that stimulates the muscle, causing a shriveling around otherwise healthy limbs. Also, time in a near-zero g environment without exercise leads to atrophy, partially due to the smaller amount of exertion needed to move about, and because muscles are not used to maintain posture. In a similar effect, patients with a broken leg joint undergoing as little as 3 weeks of traction can lose enough back and buttocks muscle mass and strength as to have difficulty sitting without assistance, and experience pain, stress, and burning even after a short 10-minute exposure, when such positioning is contrived during recovery.


== Signs and symptoms ==
Muscular atrophy decreases qualities of life as the sufferer becomes unable to perform certain tasks or worsens the risks of accidents while performing those (such as walking). Muscular atrophy increases the risks of falling in conditions such as inclusion body myositis.  Muscular atrophy affects a high number of the elderly.


== Causes ==
Many diseases and conditions cause a decrease in muscle mass, known as atrophy, including inactivity, as seen when a cast is put on a limb, or upon extended bed rest (which can occur during a prolonged illness); cachexia, which is a syndrome that is a co-morbidity of cancer and congestive heart failure;  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; burns, liver failure, etc., and the wasting Dejerine-Sottas syndrome (HMSN Type III). Glucocorticoids, a class of medications used to treat allergic and other inflammatory conditions,  can induce muscle atrophy by increasing breakdown of muscle proteins. Other syndromes or conditions that can induce skeletal muscle atrophy are liver disease and starvation.


== Pathophysiology ==

Muscle atrophy occurs by a change in the normal balance between protein synthesis and protein degradation.  During atrophy,  a down-regulation of protein synthesis pathways occurs, and an activation of protein degradation.  The particular protein degradation pathway that seems to be responsible for much of the muscle loss seen in a muscle undergoing atrophy is the ATP-dependent ubiquitin/proteasome pathway.  In this system, particular proteins are targeted for destruction by the ligation of at least four copies of a small peptide called ubiquitin onto a substrate protein.  When a substrate is thus "poly-ubiquitinated", it is targeted for destruction by the proteasome.  Particular enzymes in the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway allow ubiquitination to be directed to some proteins, but not others; specificity is gained by coupling targeted proteins to an "E3 ubiquitin ligase".  Each E3 ubiquitin ligase binds to a particular set of substrates, causing their ubiquitination.


== Diagnosis ==


=== Quantification ===
A CT scan can distinguish muscle tissue from other tissues and thereby estimate the amount of muscle tissue in the body.
Fast loss of muscle tissue (relative to normal turnover), can be approximated by the amount of urea in the urine. The equivalent nitrogen content (in grams) of urea (in mmol) can be estimated by the conversion factor 0.028 g/mmol. Furthermore, 1 g of nitrogen is roughly equivalent to 6 g of protein, and 1 g of protein is roughly equivalent to 4 g of muscle tissue. Subsequently, in situations such as muscle wasting, 1 mmol of excessive urea in the urine (as measured by urine volume in litres multiplied by urea concentration in mmol/l) roughly corresponds to a muscle loss of 0.67 g.


=== Differential diagnosis ===
During aging, a gradual decrease in the ability to maintain skeletal muscle function and mass occurs,  called "sarcopenia".  The exact cause of sarcopenia is unknown, but it may be due to a combination of the gradual failure in the "satellite cells", which help to regenerate skeletal muscle fibers, and a decrease in sensitivity to or the availability of critical secreted growth factors  necessary to maintain muscle mass and satellite cell survival.
In addition to the simple loss of muscle mass (atrophy), or the age-related decrease in muscle function (sarcopenia), other diseases may  cause structural defects in the muscle (muscular dystrophy), or by inflammatory reactions in the body directed against muscle (the myopathies).


== Treatment ==
Muscle atrophy can be opposed by the signaling pathways that induce muscle hypertrophy, or an increase in muscle size.  Therefore, one way in which exercise induces an increase in muscle mass is to downregulate the pathways that have the opposite effect.
β-Hydroxy β-methylbutyrate (HMB), a metabolite of leucine which is sold as a dietary supplement, has demonstrated efficacy in preventing the loss of muscle mass in several muscle wasting conditions in humans, particularly sarcopenia. It seems that HMB is able to act on three of the four major mechanisms involved in muscle deconditioning (protein turnover, apoptosis, and the regenerative process), whereas it is hypothesized to strongly affect the fourth (mitochondrial dynamics and functions). Moreover, HMB is cheap (about US$30–50 per month at 3 g per day) and may prevent osteopenia  and decrease cardiovascular risks.  For all these reasons, HMB should be routinely used in muscle-wasting conditions, especially in aged people.}}</ref> A growing body of evidence supports the efficacy of HMB as a treatment for reducing, or even reversing, the loss of muscle mass, muscle function, and muscle strength in hypercatabolic disease states such as cancer cachexia; consequently, as of June 2016 it is recommended that both the prevention and treatment of sarcopenia and muscle wasting in general include supplementation with HMB, regular resistance exercise, and consumption of a high-protein diet. Based upon a meta-analysis of seven randomized controlled trials that was published in 2015, HMB supplementation has efficacy as a treatment for preserving lean muscle mass in older adults. More research is needed to determine the precise effects of HMB on muscle strength and function in this age group.Since the absence of muscle-building amino acids can contribute to muscle wasting (that which is torn down must be rebuilt with like material), amino acid therapy may be helpful for regenerating damaged or atrophied muscle tissue. The branched-chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) are critical to this process, in addition to lysine and other amino acids.In severe cases of muscular atrophy, the use of an anabolic steroid such as methandrostenolone may be administered to patients as a potential treatment.
A novel class of drugs, called selective androgen receptor modulators, is being investigated with promising results. They would have fewer side effects, while still promoting muscle and bone tissue growth and regeneration. These claims are, however, yet to be confirmed in larger clinical trials.One important rehabilitation tool for muscle atrophy includes the use of functional electrical stimulation to stimulate the muscles. This has seen a large amount of success in the rehabilitation of paraplegic patients.


== Hibernation ==
Inactivity and starvation in mammals lead to atrophy of skeletal muscle, accompanied by a smaller number and size of the muscle cells as well as lower protein content. In humans, prolonged periods of immobilization, as in the cases of bed rest or astronauts flying in space, are known to result in muscle weakening and atrophy. Such consequences are also noted in small hibernating mammals like the golden-mantled ground squirrels and brown bats.Bears are an exception to this rule; species in the family Ursidae are famous for their ability to survive unfavorable environmental conditions of low temperatures and limited nutrition availability during winter by means of hibernation. During that time, bears go through a series of physiological, morphological, and behavioral changes.  Their ability to maintain skeletal muscle number and size during disuse is of significant importance.
During hibernation, bears spend 4-7 months of inactivity and anorexia without undergoing muscle atrophy and protein loss. A few known factors contribute to the sustaining of muscle tissue. During the summer, bears take advantage of the nutrition availability and accumulate muscle protein. The protein balance at time of dormancy is also maintained by lower levels of protein breakdown during the winter.  At times of immobility, muscle wasting in bears is also suppressed by a proteolytic inhibitor that is released in circulation.  Another factor that contributes to the sustaining of muscle strength in hibernating bears is the occurrence of periodic voluntary contractions and involuntary contractions from shivering during torpor.  The three to four daily episodes of muscle activity are responsible for the maintenance of muscle strength and responsiveness in bears during hibernation.


== See also ==


== Notes ==


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Muscle atrophy at Wikimedia Commons
Muscular atrophy at the US National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)