Advanced Placement Computer Science Principles (also called AP CSP or AP CS Principles) is an AP Computer Science course and examination offered by the College Board to high school students as an opportunity to earn college credit for a college-level computer science course. AP Computer Science Principles is meant to be the equivalent of a first-semester course in computer science. Assessment for AP Computer Science Principles is divided into two parts, both an end of course exam as well as the creation of artifacts throughout the course.The AP Computer Science Principles Exam was administered for the first time on May 5, 2017.


== Topic Outline ==
Curriculum OverviewThe framework focuses on computational thinking practices which are applied throughout the curriculum. The concept outline included in the curriculum is divided into seven units called "Big Ideas". Each unit contains a series of "Learning Objectives". Each "Learning Objective" is a general benchmark of student performance or understanding which has an associated "Enduring Understanding". An "Enduring Understanding" is a core comprehension which students should retain well after completing the course. Each "Learning Objective" is split into multiple "Essential Knowledge" standards, which are specific facts or content which the student must know to demonstrate mastery of the  learning objective when assessed.


== Assessment ==
Through-Course Assessment

Task 1: Explore – Implications of Computing InnovationsTask Description: In the classroom, students explore the impacts of computing on social, economic, and cultural areas of our lives
Task Time Limit: 8 hours in Class Time
Task Response Format
Written Response: Innovation : 400 word Max
Written Response: Population and Impact : 300 Word Max
Visual Artifact : Visualization or Graphic
Visual Artifact Summary: 50 Words
Evaluate, Archive and Present Task
Task 2- Create – Applications from IdeasTask Description: Students create computational artifacts through the design and development of programs.
Task Time Limit: 12 hours in Class Time
Task Response Format
Individual Program: Source Code PDF and Video
Individual Reflection : 300 words
Evaluate, Archive and Present TaskEnd-of-Course AP Exam 
The exam uses paper and pencil.
It lasts 120 minutes and includes approximately 74 questions.
The exam is composed of two sections:
Single Select Multiple-Choice: Select 1 answer from among 4 options.
Multiple Select Multiple-Choice: you select 2 answers from among 4 options


== References ==