The Bachelor of Computer Science or Bachelor of Science in Computer Science (abbreviated BCompSc or BCS or BS CS or B.Sc. CS) is a type of bachelor's degree, usually awarded after three or four years of collegiate study in computer science, but possibly awarded in fewer years depending on factors such as an institution's course requirements and academic calendar. In some cases it can be awarded in five years. In general, computer science degree programs emphasize the mathematical and theoretical foundations of computing.The same core curriculum may, depending on the school, result in other degrees, including:

Bachelor of Arts (BA) in Computer Science
Bachelor of Applied Science (BASc) in Computer Science
Bachelor of Technology in Computer Science and Engineering (B.Tech)
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
Bachelor of Mathematics in Computer Science
Bachelor of Engineering (BEng or BE) in Computer Science
Bachelor of Computing in Computer Science
Bachelor of Science in Engineering (Computer Science) - BSE (CS)
Bachelor of Computer Security in Computer Science
Bachelor of Science (BSc or BS) in Computer Science (BSc CS or BSCS or BSc (Comp)In many post-secondary institutions, an Honors Bachelor of Computer Science degree has been introduced as an upgrade to the regular bachelor's program and usually requires at least one additional year of study.


== Statistics ==
Through the data shown in pictures, jobs about software developers and applications are most welcome and have highest revenue. Even in the prediction for the next decade, it's still most popular.
In the survey of payments from 1999 to 2010, statistics shows that computer science major students' work have obviously higher salaries than most majors' students' jobs.


== Professional qualifications after finishing the degree ==
The required skills and qualifications for working as a Computer or Software Engineer comprise a large number of theoretical aspects within the areas of Computer Science and Electronics. The following list shows a classification according to the professional profiles that are currently demanded:[4]

Knowledge of, at least, one programming language (currently in use) or a specific technology in depth.
Being able to read English, since most of the documents relating to the areas of work as a computer engineer are written in this language.
Handling of version control systems. Although this is not mandatory, most companies employing computer engineers make use of version control systems.
Knowledge related to Information Theory and Telecommunications, enabling optimised and legally-compliant designs and facilitating self-control and audits if required.
Computability Theory to calculate the viability of the problem to be solved.
Efficiency awareness for industrial mechanization of information (scalability, reliability, etc ...).
Automata Theory and Algorithm Design Theory to design suitable automation solutions in information processing.
Software Engineering understanding to evaluate the best techniques of design, development and maintenance of software, subject to calculations of quality constraints, time, cost, etc..
Artificial Intelligence or Knowledge Engineering such as pattern recognition or neural networks to calculate and design knowledge production systems as an industrial competitive advantage in information management.
Electronics to calculate and design communication and control interfaces between computers and various mechanical and electrical devices, such as data acquisition systems.
Industrial and business organization understanding needed for planning, management and control of computer projects and, management of ICT departments.
Hardware knowledge to analyze and design solutions in the field of microprocessor architecture.


== Typical requirements ==
Because computer science is a wide field, courses required to earn a bachelor of computer science degree vary. A typical list of course requirements includes topics such as:
Computer programming
Programming paradigms
Algorithms
Data structures
Logic & Computation
Computer architectureSome schools may place more emphasis on mathematics  and require additional courses such as:
Linear algebra
Calculus
Probability theory and statistics
Combinatorics and discrete mathematics
Differential calculus and mathematicsBeyond the basic set of computer science courses, students can typically choose additional courses from a variety of different fields, such as:
Theory of computation
Operating systems
Numerical computation
Compilers, compiler design
Real-time computing
Distributed systems
Computer networking
Data communication
Computer graphics
Artificial intelligence
Human-computer interaction
Information theory
Software testing
Information assuranceSome schools allow students to specialize in a certain area of computer science.


== Related degrees ==
Bachelor of Software Engineering
Bachelor of Science in Information Technology
Bachelor of Computing
Bachelor of Information Technology
Bachelor of Computer Information Systems
Bachelor in computer design


== References ==