Barry Smith (born June 4, 1952) is an academic working in the fields of ontology and biomedical informatics. Smith is the author of more than 600 scientific publications, including 15 authored or edited books.


== Education and career ==
From 1970 to 1973 Smith studied Mathematics and Philosophy at the University of Oxford. He obtained his PhD from the University of Manchester in 1976 for a dissertation on ontology and reference in Husserl and Frege. The dissertation was supervised by Wolfe Mays.
Among the cohort of graduate students working under Mays' direction were Kevin Mulligan (Geneva/Lugano), and Peter Simons (Trinity College, Dublin), both of whom shared with Smith an interest in the contributions of certain turn-of-the-century Continental philosophers and logicians to central issues of analytic philosophy. In 1979 Mulligan, Simons and Smith together founded the Seminar for Austro-German Philosophy, which organized workshops and conferences centered around the work of early Central European philosophers from Bolzano to Tarski and their impact on contemporary philosophy.
From 1976 to 1994 Smith held appointments at the University of Sheffield (1976–1979), the University of Manchester (1979–1989) and the International Academy of Philosophy, Liechtenstein (1989–1994). In 1994 he moved to the University at Buffalo (New York, USA), where he is currently Julian Park Distinguished Professor of Philosophy and Affiliate Professor of Biomedical Informatics, Computer Science and Engineering, and Neurology. From 2002 to 2006 Smith served as founding Director of the Institute for Formal Ontology and Medical Information Science (IFOMIS) in Leipzig, Germany. The Institute moved to Saarbrücken in 2004.
In 2005 Smith founded the National Center for Ontological Research (NCOR), under the auspices of which he initiated in 2006 the Ontology for the Intelligence Community, subsequently STIDS, conference series. Smith was also responsible for initiating the International Conference on Biomedical Ontology (ICBO).From 1992 to 2016 Smith served as editor of  The Monist: An International Quarterly Journal of General Philosophical Inquiry.
Since 2016 Smith has served as editor of international standard ISO/IEC 21838: Top Level Ontologies. Part 1 of this standard specifies the requirements for being a top-level (which means: domain-neutral) ontology. Part 2 is devoted to Basic Formal Ontology (BFO).


== Research activities ==
From the beginning of his career Smith has worked in the field of ontology, initially on the history of  ontology as a sub-discipline of philosophy in the tradition of Brentano, Husserl, Ingarden and Reinach. A special focus was on the theory of ontological dependence proposed by Husserl, and applied by his students for example to the understanding of the ontology of mental and linguistic acts. In 1984 he published together with Mulligan and Simons the paper "Truth-Makers". This paper helped to launch truthmaker theory, a still active research program at the borderlines of logic, semantics and philosophical ontology, based on a new understanding of the correspondence theory of truth.
In the 1990s he worked closely with David Mark, one of the founders of geographic information science (GIS), on initiatives in the field of geospatial ontology. In this connection he introduced the idea of fiat objects to describe (typically rectangular) geospatial entities such as postal districts and real estate parcels which are not separated from their surroundings by any physical discontinuity. This terminology has been generalized into other fields.Since 2000 his research has been centered on the application of ontology in biomedical informatics, where he has worked on a variety of projects relating to biomedical terminologies and electronic health records.Smith is leader of the  Basic Formal Ontology (BFO) top level ontology project. He is a Coordinating Editor of the OBO Foundry and has served as a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of the Gene Ontology Consortium, and of the Ontology for Biomedical Investigations (OBI) Working Group.Smith has contributed to work on the ontology of social reality, particularly in connection with the work of John Searle. He serves as consultant to  Hernando de Soto, Director of the Institute for Liberty and Democracy in Peru, on projects relating to the advancement of property and business rights among the poor in developing countries.
Since 2008 Smith has worked on ontology initiatives in the military and intelligence field and also in the field of industrial and systems engineering. In 2008–2010 he served as technical lead on a project sponsored by the US Army Net-Centric Data Strategy Center of Excellence (ANCDS CoE) to create the Universal Core Semantic Layer (UCore-SL). Since 2010 he was worked on a series of initiatives sponsored by the US Army Intelligence and Information Warfare Directorate (I2WD) to create a framework for semantic enhancement of intelligence data in the Cloud. Since 2014 he is collaborator on initiatives of the US Air Force Research Laboratory on planning, mission assurance, and lifecycle management. In this connection he is working on a project to create a Joint Doctrine Ontology.
Since 2016 Smith has been centrally involved in the Industrial Ontologies Foundry (IOF) initiative, which is creating a set of open ontologies to support the data needs of the manufacturing and engineering industries in a way that will advance data interoperability. Basic Formal Ontology, which serves as the top-level hub of the IOF, has been applied in the development of ontologies for maintenance, supply chain, product life cycle, and additive manufacturing.


== Recognition ==
1999 Fellow of the American Philosophical Society
2002 Wolfgang Paul Award, Alexander von Humboldt Foundation
2010 First Paolo Bozzi Prize for Ontology, University of Turin
2014 Fellow of the American College of Medical Informatics (FACMI)Leo Zaibert's The Theory and Practice of Ontology (2016) and Gloria Zúñiga y Postigo and Gerald J. Erion's Barry Smith an sich (2017) are Festschrifts dedicated to Smith containing studies of his work by colleagues and students.


== Bibliography ==


=== Books ===
Structure and Gestalt: Philosophy and Literature in Austria-Hungary and Her Successor States (ed.), 1981.
Parts and Moments. Studies in Logic and Formal Ontology (ed.), Munich/Vienna: Philosophia, 1982.
Foundations of Gestalt Theory (ed.), Munich/Vienna: Philosophia, 1988.
Adolf Reinach, Sämtliche Werke. Kritische Ausgabe mit Kommentar, Band I: Die Werke, Teil I: Kritische Neuausgabe (1905–1914), Teil II: Nachgelassene Texte (1906–1917); Band II: Kommentar und Textkritik (ed. with Karl Schuhmann), Munich/Vienna: Philosophia 1989.
Handbook of Metaphysics and Ontology, 2 vols. (ed. with Hans Burkhardt), Munich/Vienna: Philosophia, 1991.
Austrian Philosophy: The Legacy of Franz Brentano, Chicago-LaSalle, Open Court, 1994.
The Cambridge Companion to Husserl (ed., with David W. Smith), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Rationality and Irrationality (ed., with Berit Brogaard), Vienna: öbv&hpt, 2001.
Formal Ontology in Information Systems (ed., with Christopher Welty), New York: ACM Press, 2001.
John Searle (ed.), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Applied Ontology: An Introduction (ed. with K. Munn), 2008.
The Mystery of Capital and the Construction of Social Reality (ed. with David Mark and Isaac Ehrlich), Chicago: Open Court, 2008.
Biomedizinische Ontologie. Wissen strukturieren für den Informatik-Einsatz (ed. with Ludger Jansen), Zurich: vdf, 2008.
Building Ontologies with Basic Formal Ontology, with Robert Arp and Andrew Spear, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2015.


== References ==


== External links ==
Barry Smith's faculty page at the University of Buffalo
National Center for Ontological Research
WorldCat au:Barry Smith (1952)