Boon Thau Loo is a Singaporean-American computer scientist, university administrator, and businessperson. Loo is currently the RCA chair professor in the Computer and Information Science department at the University of Pennsylvania, and serves as the Associate Dean of Master's and Professional Programs at the University of Pennsylvania School of Engineering and Applied Science. He is also cofounder of Gencore Systems, a Penn spinoff company on cloud performance monitoring that was later renamed Netsil and acquired by Nutanix, and Termaxia, a big data storage company.


== Early life ==
Boon Thau Loo was born in Malaysia and grew up in Singapore. In 1996, he moved to the United States in order to attend the University of California, Berkeley, where he received an undergraduate degree in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. Following his studies there, he pursued his master's degree in computer sciences at Stanford University. He then returned to Berkeley for his PhD, which he graduated in 2006 with the David J. Sakrison Memorial Prize dissertation award and the 2007 ACM SIGMOD Dissertation Award for his thesis The Design and Implementation of Declarative Networks. Following his studies, Loo began working as a post-doctoral researcher at Microsoft Research.


== Academic career ==
As a scholar, Loo became the RCA chair professor at the University of Pennsylvania in the departments of Computer and Information Science and Electrical and Systems Engineering. At Penn he is also the director of the Distributed Systems Laboratory and the NetDB@Penn research group. In 2018, he became the associate dean of master's and professional programs, where he oversees all Master's and professional programs in the School of Engineering and Applied Science. As associate dean, Loo led several new academic initiatives, such as MCIT Online, first Ivy League fully online master's degree program in computer science for non-computer science majors, the J.P. Eckert Diversity Fellowship, a Penn engineering school-wide professional career development course for master's students, Cybersecurity boot camp for mid-career professionals in the Philadelphia greater area, annual Master's awards, and the accelerated master's program for Penn undergraduates.
While serving as a researcher and professor, Loo has founded several private enterprises. He has published over 100 papers and two books - Declarative Networking (Synthesis Lectures on Data Management) in 2012 and Datalog and Recursive Query Processing (Foundations and Trends(r) in Databases) in 2013.


== Business career ==
In 2013, Loo formed a partnership with the OpenLab of Juniper Networks and integrated his group's research on high-performance declarative network analytics into Juniper's newly acquired Contrail SDN platform. Through this research, in 2013 Loo cofounded Gencore Systems with a group of his students at Penn, and in 2015, the company raised seed funding in addition to a SBIR (Small Business Innovative Research) grant from the National Science Foundation. The Gencore software monitors application performance in public cloud infrastructure. The company was renamed Netsil and acquired by Nutanix in 2018. In 2015, Loo also cofounded Termaxia, a big data storage company, where he serves as Chief Scientist.


== Recognition ==
In 2018, Loo was awarded the Emerging Inventor of the Year prize from the Penn Center for Innovation.


== References ==