The Center for Minorities and People with Disabilities in Information Technology (CMD-IT) is an American 501(c)(3), non-profit organization of public and private agencies, corporations, and institutions that focuses on supporting the development of an information technology workforce strong in under-represented groups including African Americans, Native Americans, Hispanics, and People with disabilities.


== Programs and Initiatives ==
CMD-IT ("command it") supports the following programs and initiatives:

Tapia Conference. The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity in Computing is a leading conference for celebrating diversity in computing.  Tapia 2015 conference demographics included 35% African American, 22% Hispanic, 53% Women, and 1% people with disabilities.  The Tapia Conference is sponsored by Association for Computing Machinery, organized by the Coalition to Diversify Computing, and presented by CMD-IT.
Academic Career Workshops for Underrepresented Participants.   In these workshops, under-represented assistant- and associate-level faculty, senior doctoral students, and post-docs are mentored in areas related to the academic career ladder.  The workshops include panels of diverse senior faculty focused on areas such as the tenure and promotion process, launching a research program, effective teaching, and proposal writing.  The workshops have been funded by NSF since 2007.
Newsletter.  The organization newsletter is distributed several times a year to over 3500 students, faculty, and professionals. It includes a calendar of events from different organizations and groups focused on the target groups and two to three important articles about current news or initiatives related to minorities and people with disabilities in IT.
Graduation Statistics of Underrepresented Groups in Computing.  This project utilizes multiple databases, including WebCASPAR and CRA Taulbee Survey, to gather statistics about the graduation rates for the different computer science degree levels (associate, bachelor, masters, doctorate) for ethnic minorities and where possible, people with disabilities.


== See also ==
Association for Computing Machinery
Coalition to Diversify Computing
Computing Research Association Taulbee Survey (Gender and Diversity)
Diversity in computing
Richard Tapia Celebration of Diversity in Computing


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
CRA Taulbee Survey website