The Computer Pioneer Award was established in 1981 by the Board of Governors of the IEEE Computer Society to recognize and honor the vision of those people whose efforts resulted in the creation and continued vitality of the computer industry. The award is presented to outstanding individuals whose main contribution to the concepts and development of the computer field was made at least fifteen years earlier.
The recognition is engraved on a silver medal specially struck for the Society.
All members of the profession are invited to nominate a colleague who they consider most eligible to be considered for this award. The nomination deadline is the 15 October of each year.
The award has two type of recipients:

Computer Pioneer Charter Recipients - At the inauguration of this award the individuals who already meet the Computer Pioneer Award criteria, and also have received IEEE Computer Society awards prior to 1981.
Computer Pioneer Recipients - Awarded annually since 1981.


== Computer Pioneer Charter Recipients ==
Howard H. Aiken - Large-Scale Automatic Computation
Samuel N. Alexander - SEAC
Gene M. Amdahl - Large-Scale Computer Architecture
John W. Backus - FORTRAN
Robert S. Barton - Language-Directed Architecture
C. Gordon Bell - Computer Design
Frederick P. Brooks, Jr. - Compatible Computer Family System/IBM 360
Wesley A. Clark - First Personal Computer
Fernando J. Corbato - Timesharing
Seymour R. Cray - Scientific Computer Systems
Edsger W. Dijkstra - Multiprogramming Control
J. Presper Eckert - First All-Electronic Computer: ENIAC
Jay W. Forrester - First Large-Scale Coincident Current Memory
Herman H. Goldstine - Contributions to Early Computer Design
Richard W. Hamming - Error-correcting code
Jean A. Hoerni - Planar Semiconductor Manufacturing Process
Grace M. Hopper - Automatic Programming
Alston S. Householder - Numerical Methods
David A. Huffman 	- Sequential Circuit Design
Kenneth E. Iverson - APL
Tom Kilburn - Paging Computer Design
Donald E. Knuth - Science of Computer Algorithms
Herman Lukoff - Early Electronic Computer Circuits
John W. Mauchly - First All-Electronic Computer: ENIAC
Gordon E. Moore - Integrated Circuit Production Technology
Allen Newell - Contributions to Artificial Intelligence
Robert N. Noyce - Integrated Circuit Production Technology
Lawrence G. Roberts - Packet Switching
George R. Stibitz - First Remote Computation
Shmuel Winograd - Efficiency of Computational Algorithms
Maurice V. Wilkes - Microprogramming
Konrad Zuse - First Process Control Computer
See external list of Computer Pioneer Charter Recipients


== Computer Pioneer Recipients ==
Source: IEEE Computer Society


== Nomination process ==
Nomination process


== See also ==
List of prizes, medals and awards
Prizes named after people


== External links ==
IEEE Computer Society Awards

IEEE Computer Pioneer Award