Computer science and engineering (CSE) is an academic program at some universities that integrates the fields of computer engineering and computer science. It is a sub-field of electronics engineering, focusing the digital electronics domain with added courses in computer architecture, processor design, operating systems, high-performance computing, parallel processing, computer networks and embedded systems. CSE programs also include core subjects of computer science such as theory of computation, design and analysis of algorithms, data structures and database systems. The program aims at designing, developing and troubleshooting computing devices and systems (such as personal computers, supercomputers, robots, smartphones, networking devices, embedded devices), focusing the underlying fundamental issues (like processor architecture design, operating system design, memory management, digital system design, communication protocol design, system software development, application software development and database management) in the most efficient and effective way. Emerging technologies like artificial intelligence, machine learning and data science are also covered under these programs.
Computer science programs typically centers primarily around theory and software, with only some hardware; upper division courses tend to allow a lot of freedom to specialize in software and theory related areas (e.g. algorithms, artificial intelligence, cryptography/security, graphics/visualization, numerical and symbolic computing, operating systems/distributed processing, software engineering).
Computer engineering programs tend to resemble computer science at the lower division with similar introductory programming and math courses, but diverges from computer science at the upper division with heavy electrical engineering requirements (e.g. digital and analog circuits, integrated circuit design, VLSI design and control systems). Despite the overlap with computer science at the lower division level, computer engineering skews much more heavily toward the electronics side that it has more in common with electrical engineering.
Computer science and engineering integrates all of the above and is intended to develop a solid understanding of the entire machine (computer hardware and software). The higher unit count required to complete the program often means that a CSE student will need to spend an extra year in university.
Although Computer Science and Engineering is the common designation for the combined program, some universities (such as Berkeley and MIT) deviate by calling their program Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS). Furthermore, there are some universities (such as UCI and UC Merced) that named their department EECS and the program housed within CSE.


== See also ==
Computer Science
Computer Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Software Engineering


== References ==

"Computer Science Engineering". Shiksha. Retrieved 2019-07-30.