Craig Gotsman is an academic innovator and hi-tech entrepreneur. He is a Distinguished Professor and the Dean of the Ying Wu College of Computing at the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT). Before NJIT, he was co-founder of the Cornell Tech campus in New York City and Founding Director of the Jacobs Technion-Cornell Institute there. Gotsman has also co-founded several technology startup companies and consulted to many large technology corporations.


== Early life ==
Born in the UK, Gotsman spent his early childhood in South Africa. His family immigrated to Israel in 1973.
He was awarded all his academic degrees, including a PhD in Computer Science in 1991, from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
During 1984-89, Gotsman served as an officer in the Technological R&D Unit of the Israel Defense Forces, retiring from active reserve duty in 2005 with the rank of Major.


== Academic career ==
Specializing in computer graphics and geometry processing, Gotsman joined the Computer Science Department at the Technion – Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa as an Assistant Professor in 1991. In 2005 he co-founded the Center for Graphics and Geometric Computing, and in 2006 he became the first incumbent of the Technion’s Hewlett-Packard Chair in Computer Engineering.Gotsman was Visiting Professor at Harvard University and Research Scientist at MIT during 2003-2004, Visiting Professor at INRIA, Sophia Antipolis in 2006 and Visiting Professor at ETH Zurich in 2010. After helping co-found the Cornell Tech campus in New York City , he served in leadership roles and on the faculty there during 2012-2016.
Gotsman has mentored over 50 students at the postgraduate level, served on the editorial boards of computer graphics international journals and served on the program committees of international conferences in computer graphics. He has published over 150 research papers and holds 11 US patents, some commercialized and incorporated into software products.
Gotsman is best known for his work on online maps and aerial imagery and its combination with 3D terrain elevation data (a precursor to Google Earth), compression of 3D datasets, which was incorporated into the MPEG-4 compression standard, the use of spectral methods in geometry processing, and various methods for analyzing and processing discrete geometric data sets, in particular triangle mesh data, both static and dynamic. In recent years, Gotsman has developed a number of software applications taking advantage of the emerging new generation of range imaging cameras.Gotsman is a Fellow of the National Academy of Inventors 
and a Fellow of the Academy of Europe (Academia Europaea)  .


=== Cornell Tech ===
Gotsman played a leading role in the formation of the Cornell Tech campus in New York City. 
 
Cornell Tech is an applied sciences campus dedicated to fostering innovation and producing entrepreneurial engineers, a project conceived and driven by former Mayor Michael Bloomberg and the New York City Economic Development Corporation, with the purpose of growing the tech sector of NYC.In 2011, Gotsman helped develop the proposal to establish an Applied Sciences campus, submitted by Cornell University and Technion to the City of New York. The proposal subsequently won the bid, competing against a number of groups of international universities, including Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Stanford University. 
Technion was cited as "the MIT of Israel" and a key player because of its innovation culture and contribution to the emergence of Israel as a global technological superpower, as documented in the book "Startup Nation".In 2011, Gotsman was appointed Deputy Senior Vice-President (equivalent to Vice Provost) at Technion, responsible for the joint Technion-Cornell venture. In Feb 2012 he was appointed Founding Director of the joint Jacobs Technion-Cornell Innovation Institute at Cornell Tech. In this role, Gotsman developed a number of novel academic and entrepreneurial programs, including the successful Runway program,

supporting PhDs forming commercial ventures based on their deep technical expertise. He also engaged in faculty and student recruiting, corporate relations, media relations and fund raising. In April 2013, he helped raise a $133M naming gift from Joan and Irwin M. Jacobs of San Diego.


=== New Jersey Institute of Technology ===
In 2017, Gotsman was named Distinguished Professor and Dean of the Ying Wu College of Computing at New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT). NJIT, a R1 research university, enrolls more than 11,800 STEM students, of which  over 2,800 students study within the College of Computing. The College graduates close 800 computing professionals every year, making it the largest generator of computing talent in the New York metro area. NJIT is known for its diverse student body, of whom 35% are first-generation students. One of only 32 polytechnic universities in the USA, NJIT is ranked #1 in the USA for student upward economic mobility by the New York Times 
and Forbes , and among the top 2% of public universities in return on educational investment, according to PayScale.com .
At NJIT, Gotsman has been responsible for completely modernizing the College physical facilities, recruiting a new generation of junior and senior faculty, building extensive corporate relationships and launching an IT-focused entrepreneurship program. He is also responsible for founding a satellite campus in Jersey City (across the Hudson river from Lower Manhattan) dedicated to graduate-level studies and continuing education in Data Science and Cybersecurity, and establishing the new cross-NJIT research Institute for Data Science, led by David Bader (computer scientist).


== Entrepreneurship ==
Gotsman co-founded three startup companies: Virtue3D was founded in 1997 and developed advanced technologies for Web-based 3D computer graphics based on Technion intellectual property. The principal investors were Zohar and Yehuda Zisapel and Eurofund. The technology was eventually acquired by German Mental Images, itself later acquired by NVIDIA. Estimotion - a precursor to Waze – was founded in 2000 and developed technologies for real-time traffic-based applications for cellular phones. The principal investors were Partner/Orange Communications and Shlomo Group. Estimotion was acquired by British ITIS Holdings, itself later acquired by INRIX. CatchEye
 – commercializing 3D camera-related video-processing technology that Gotsman developed with colleagues at ETH Zurich - was founded in 2014 and acquired in 2017.Gotsman also co-founded in 2006 an active consulting company - Geometrika – which develops graphics and geometric software technologies.


== Other Activities ==


=== Outreach ===
While at Technion, Gotsman served as Associate Dean for Computing during 2001-2003. He also founded its Industrial Affiliates Program and Alumni Program and served as Associate Dean for External Relations during 2005-2008.


=== Industrial Activity ===
Gotsman served as consultant for HP Labs in Haifa and spent summers during 1993-1996 at HP Labs in Palo Alto. He has also consulted for companies in Israel, Europe and the USA, including Nokia, Shell Oil, Disney, Intel, Rafael, Autodesk and Samsung.


=== Public Service ===
In 2014, Gotsman served as a technology expert on the New York City Metropolitan Transportation Authority Reinvention Commission, appointed by the governor of NY State. In its report, the commission recommended a number of reforms to the public transportation systems in New York City. Gotsman is also active in the entrepreneurial community in New York City, in particular through the New York City Economic Development Corporation.


== Select Bibliography ==
Kuster C., Popa T., Bazin J.-C., Gotsman C. and Gross M. "Gaze Correction for Home Video Conferencing", ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia), 31(6):174, 2012.
Xu Y., Liu L., Gotsman C. and Gortler S.J. "Capacity-Constrained Delaunay Triangulation for Point Distributions", Computers and Graphics (Proc. SMI), 35(3):510-516, 2011.
Ben-Chen M., Weber O. and Gotsman C. "Variational Harmonic Maps for Space Deformation", ACM Transactions on Graphics 28(3), (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 2009.
Weber O., Ben-Chen M. and Gotsman C. "Complex Barycentric Coordinates with Applications to Image Deformation", Computer Graphics Forum, 28(2):587-597, 2009.
Liu L., Zhang L., Xu Y., Gotsman C. and Gortler S.J. "A Local/Global Approach to Mesh Parameterization", Computer Graphics Forum, 27(5):1495-1504, (Proc. Symp. Geometry Proc.), 2008.
Gortler S.J., Gotsman C. and Thurston D. "Discrete One-forms on Meshes and Applications to 3D Mesh Parameterization", Computer Aided Geometric Design, 33(2):83-112, 2006.
Sumner R.W., Zwicker M., Gotsman C. and Popovic J. "Mesh-based Inverse Kinematics", ACM Transactions on Graphics, 24(3):488-495, (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 2005.
Bogomjakov A. and Gotsman C. "Universal Rendering Sequences for Transparent Vertex Caching of Progressive Meshes", Computer Graphics Forum, 21(2):137-148, 2002.
Karni Z. and Gotsman C. "Spectral Compression of Mesh Geometry", Computer Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 279-286, 2000.
Touma C. and Gotsman C. "Triangle Mesh Compression", Proc. Graphics Interface 98, 1998.
Rabinovich B. and Gotsman C. "Visualization of Large Terrains in Resource-Limited Computing Environments", Proc. IEEE Visualization, 1997.


== References ==


== External links ==
LinkedIn profile
Google Scholar profile