Florian Neukart is an Austrian computer scientist, mathematician, and scientific author. He is known for his work in the fields of quantum computing and artificial intelligence, particularly on how to reverse-engineer the mind by gradually replacing the biological brain with artificial components, such as quantum nano-bots, electrodes, or a neural lace. In his work, he describes methods for interpreting signals in the human brain in combination with paradigms from artificial intelligence, allowing for the creation of artificial conscious entities (ACE).


== Biography and work ==
Florian Neukart holds a Ph.D. in quantum computing and artificial intelligence from the Transilvania University of Brasov, as well as a master's degree in information technology from the CAMPUS02 University of Applied Sciences in Graz, and a master's degree in computer science from the Joanneum University of Applied Sciences in Kapfenberg. He works as Director, Advanced Technologies and IT Strategy at Volkswagen Group, Region Americas, where he is concerned with research in the fields of quantum computing, quantum machine learning, artificial intelligence, and materials science. Neukart, born in Bruck/ Mur, is also an assistant professor for quantum computing at Leiden University.He is the author of the book "Reverse Engineering the Mind Consciously Acting Machines and Accelerated Evolution", where he elaborates on establishing a symbiotic relationship between a biological brain, sensors, AI and quantum hard- and software, resulting in solutions for the continuous consciousness-problem as well as other state of the art problems. He argues that a path to artificial intelligence is through the gradual replacement of a brain with artificial components and that strong artificial intelligence based on biological intelligence can be developed. In this context, he has proposed a new theory of mind, fusing non-eliminative materialism, functionalism, and identity theory, arguing that current theories must be broadened to explain artificial intelligence on a biological substrate. The main argument is that non-eliminative materialism covers novel ideas like quantum physical explanations of the mind, but it does not take into account the software, thus the algorithm of mind, working on the hardware. Functionalism does that in the way that it states that the mind is the software running on brains and that different physical implementations may be realized for processing the ‘mind-algorithm’. Identity theory states that each external sensation may cause different internal sensations, which of course may be different from individual to individual, but if the resulting internal sensation of two individuals is the same, also the same areas of the brain are affected. His argument against identity theory centers around a biological point of view, as it does not support the implementation of computers that equally well serve the minds of different people, and not just the mind of one specific person. Although the basic structure of all human brains is the same, there are differences in the number and structure of neural connections or brain functionality on the neural layer.His research continues to attract considerable public international attention and earned him numerous speaking invitations on both conferences and more private venues. He was one of the first researchers to propose and implement quantum neural networks. He is a pioneer in applied quantum computing and among the first ones to solve real-world problems of society and environment by means of quantum computing. He was the first one to have introduced practical quantum computing in academic education worldwide. He currently works as Director, Advanced Technologies and IT Strategy at Volkswagen Group of America and assistant professor in the field of quantum computing at the University of Leiden. He was named by the IEEE Computer Society as one of the leading experts in predictive analytics. Neukart was awarded by the Science Park Austria for his work in biologically-inspired artificial intelligence software.


== References ==