The IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) is an annual micro- and nanoelectronics conference held each December that serves as a forum for reporting technological breakthroughs in the areas of semiconductor and related device technologies, design, manufacturing, physics, modeling and circuit-device interaction.The IEDM is where "Moore’s Law" got its name, as Gordon Moore first published his predictions in an article in Electronics Magazine in 1965.  Ten years later he refined them in a talk at the IEDM, and from that point on people began referring to them as Moore's Law. Moore’s Law states that the complexity of integrated circuits would double approximately every two years.IEDM brings together managers, engineers, and scientists from industry, academia, and government around the world to discuss nanometer-scale CMOS transistor technology, advanced memory, displays, sensors, MEMS devices, novel quantum and nanoscale devices using emerging phenomena, optoelectronics, power, energy harvesting, and ultra-high-speed devices, as well as process technology and device modeling and simulation.  The conference also encompasses discussions and presentations on devices in silicon, compound and organic semiconductors, and emerging material systems.  In addition to technical paper presentations, IEDM includes multiple plenary presentations, panel sessions, tutorials, short courses, and invited talks and an entrepreneurship panel session conducted by experts in the field from around the globe.
The 65th annual IEDM will be held at the Hilton San Francisco Union Square hotel December 7–11, 2019.


== Sponsor ==
The International Electron Devices Meeting is sponsored by the Electron Devices Society of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).


== History ==
The First Annual Technical Meeting on Electron Devices (renamed the International Electron Devices Meeting in the mid-1960s) took place on October 24–25, 1955 at the Shoreham Hotel in Washington D.C. with approximately 700 scientists and engineers in attendance.  At that time, the seven-year-old transistor and the electron tube reigned as the predominant electron-device technology.  Fifty-four papers were presented on the then state-of-the-art in electron device technology, the majority of them from four U.S. companies -- Bell Telephone Laboratories, RCA Corporation, Hughes Aircraft Co. and Sylvania Electric Products.  The need for an electron devices meeting was driven by two factors: commercial opportunities in the fast-growing new "solid-state" branch of electronics, and the U.S. government's desire for solid-state components and better microwave tubes for aerospace and defense.


== IEDM 2018 ==
The 2018 IEEE-IEDM took place at the Hilton San Francisco Union Square from December 1–5, 2018. Highlights included three plenary talks that addressed key future directions for semiconductor technology and business practices. Jeffery Welser, Vice President of IBM Research-Almaden, spoke about the hardware needed for artificial research (AI), while Eun Seung Jung, President of Samsung's Foundry Business, spoke about the challenges and oportunities facing chip foundries. Professor Gerhard Fettweis of TU Dresden, meanwhile, spoke about new ways to structure research into semiconductors to effectively pursue non-traditional uses  such as bendable, flexible electronic systems. The conference also included an evening panel discussion during which a panel of industry experts looked forward for the next 25 years.  The technical program featured many noteworthy papers on a range of topics, such as innovative memories for AI applications; quantum computing; wireless communications; power devices; and many more.


== IEDM 2017 ==
The 2017 IEEE International Devices Meeting took place at the Hilton San Francisco Union Square from December 2–6, 2017. Highlights included Nobel Prize winner Hiroshi Amano speaking on ‘Transformative Electronics’, AMD President & CEO Lisa Su speaking on multi-chip technologies for high-performance computing; and Intel and Globalfoundries detailing their competing new FinFET technology platforms. Also, IBM’s Dan Edelstein gave a retrospective on copper interconnect. Copper interconnect (i.e., the wiring on computer chips) revolutionized the industry 20 years ago.


== IEDM 2016 ==
The 2016 IEEE International Devices Meeting took place at the Hilton San Francisco Union Square from December 3–7, 2016. The 2016 edition of the IEDM emphasized the following topics: advanced transistors, new memory technologies, brain-inspired computing, bioelectronics, and power electronics.


== IEDM 2015 ==
The 2015 International Electron Devices Meeting took place at the Washington Hilton Hotel from December 5–9, 2015. The major topics included ultra-small transistors, advanced memories, low-power devices for mobile & Internet of Things (IoT) applications,  alternatives to silicon transistors, and 3D integrated circuit (IC) technology. There were also a broad range of papers addressing some of the fastest-growing specialized areas in micro/nanoelectronics, including silicon photonics, physically flexible circuits, and brain-inspired computing.


== IEDM 2014 ==
The 2014 International Electron Devices Meeting took place at the Hilton San Francisco Union Square from December 15–17, 2014. The 2014 edition of the IEDM emphasized 14 nm FinFET transistor processes, power electronics, bio-sensors and MEMS/NEMS technologies for medical applications, new memory devices, display and sensor technologies, and 3D device architectures.


== References ==


== Additional information ==
IEDM
IEDM on Facebook
IEDM on Twitter: @ieee_iedm
Electron Device Society of the IEEE
IEEE
IEEE Xplore Digital Library


== Related conferences ==
Symposia on VLSI Technology and Circuits
International Solid-State Circuits Conference
Device Research Conference
Hot Chips: A Symposium of High Performance Chips