The International Conference on Business Process Management is an academic conference organized annually by the BPM community. The conference was first organized in 2003 Eindhoven, Netherlands.
Since then the conference has been organized annually. 
The conference is the premium forum for researchers, practitioners and developers in the field of Business Process Management (BPM).
The conference typically attracts over 300 participants from all over the world.
The BPM Steering Committee is responsible for the conference, including selection of organizers, invited speakers,  workshops, etc.


== Topics ==

Topics covered by the conference include:

Business process modeling
BPM/WFM systems
Process mining
Business process intelligence
Workflow automation
Process change management
Reference process models
Process modeling languages
Case management
Process variability and configuration
Operations research for business processes
Collaborative business process management
Qualitative and quantitative process analysis (e.g. process simulation)
Management aspects of BPM
Decision management
Process discovery
Process compliance
Process innovation
Process execution architectures


== History ==
The first conference was organized by Wil van der Aalst and was held in conjunction with the 24th International Conference on Applications and Theory of Petri Nets in Eindhoven. Since BPM 2005 in Nancy, the conference has co-located workshops in different subfields of BPM.

BPM 2020 in Sevilla, Spainn.A.
BPM 2019 in Vienna, Austria PC Co-Chairs: Thomas Hildebrandt, Boudewijn van Dongen, Maximilian Röglinger, Jan Mendling
General Chair: Jan Mendling, Stefanie Rinderle-Ma
Workshop Chairs: Remco Dijkman, Chiara di Francescomarino, Uwe Zdun
BPM 2018 in Sydney, Australia
PC Co-Chairs: Mathias Weske, Marco Montali, Ingo Weber, Jan vom Brocke
General Chair: Boualem Benatallah and Jian Yang
Workshop Chairs: Florian Daniel, Hamid Motahari, Michael Sheng
BPM 2017 in Barcelona, Spain PC Co-Chairs: Josep Carmona, Gregor Engels, Akhil Kumar
General Chair: Josep Carmona
Workshop Chairs: Matthias Weidlich, Ernest Teniente
BPM 2016 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil PC Co-Chairs: Marcello La Rosa, Peter Loos, Oscar Pastor
General Chair: Flávia Santoro
Workshop Chairs: Marlon Dumas, Marcelo Fantinato
BPM 2015 in Innsbruck, Austria PC Co-Chairs: Hamid Reza Motahari-Nezhad, Jan Recker, Matthias Weidlich
General Chair: Barbara Weber
BPM 2014 in Eindhoven, Netherlands (relocated from Haifa, Israel) PC Co-Chairs: Shazia Sadiq, Pnina Soffer, Hagen Völzer
General Co-Chairs: Avigdor Gal, Mor Peleg
Local Chair: Wil van der Aalst
BPM 2013 in Beijing, China PC Co-Chairs: Florian Daniel, Jianmin Wang, Barbara Weber
General Chair: Jianmin Wang
BPM 2012 in Tallinn, Estonia PC Co-Chairs: Alistair Barros, Avi Gal, Ekkart Kindler
General Chair: Marlon Dumas
BPM 2011 in Clermont-Ferrand, France PC Co-Chairs: Stefanie Rinderle-Ma, Farouk Toumani, Karsten Wolf
General Chair: Farouk Toumani, Mohand-Said Hacid
BPM 2010 in Hoboken (NJ), United States PC Co-Chairs: Richard Hull, Jan Mendling, Stefan Tai
General Chair: Michael zur Mühlen
BPM 2009 in Ulm, Germany PC Co-Chairs: Umeshwar Dayal, Johann Eder, Hajo A. Reijers
General Chairs: Peter Dadam, Manfred Reichert
BPM 2008 in Milan, Italy PC Co-Chairs: Marlon Dumas, Manfred Reichert, Ming-Chien Shan
General Chair: Barbara Pernici
BPM 2007 in Brisbane, Australia PC Co-Chairs: Gustavo Alonso, Peter Dadam, Michael Rosemann
General Chairs: Marlon Dumas, Michael Rosemann
BPM 2006 in Vienna, Austria PC Co-Chairs: Schahram Dustdar, José Luiz Fiadeiro, Amit P. Sheth
General Chair: Schahram Dustdar
BPM 2005 in Nancy, France PC Co-Chairs: Wil M. P. van der Aalst, Boualem Benatallah, Fabio Casati
General Chair: Claude Godart
BPM 2004 in Potsdam, Germany PC Co-Chairs: Jörg Desel, Barbara Pernici, Mathias Weske
General Chair: Mathias Weske
BPM 2003 in Eindhoven, Netherlands PC Co-Chairs: Wil van der Aalst, Arthur H. M. ter Hofstede, Mathias Weske
General Chair: Wil van der Aalst


== See also ==
The list of computer science conferences contains other academic conferences in computer science.
The topics of the conference cover the field of computer science.
Process mining is a process management technique that allows for the analysis of business processes based on event logs.
Business Process Management (BPM)  includes methods, techniques, and tools to support the design, enactment, management, and analysis of operational business processes. It can be considered as an extension of classical Workflow Management (WFM) systems and approaches.


== References ==


== External links ==
Website of the BPM Conference Series.
BPM Steering Committee
Website of the 15th International Conference on Business Process Management, Barcelona, September 2017.
DBLP entry listing all BPM conference proceedings (including workshops)
BPM Newsletters (two issues per year)