In computer science and mathematical logic, a proof assistant or interactive theorem prover is a software tool to assist with the development of formal proofs by human-machine collaboration. This involves some sort of interactive proof editor, or other interface, with which a human can guide the search for proofs, the details of which are stored in, and some steps provided by, a computer.


== Comparison of systems ==

ACL2 – a programming language, a first-order logical theory, and a theorem prover (with both interactive and automatic modes) in the Boyer–Moore tradition.
Coq – Which allows the expression of mathematical assertions, mechanically checks proofs of these assertions, helps to find formal proofs, and extracts a certified program from the constructive proof of its formal specification.
HOL theorem provers – A family of tools ultimately derived from the LCF theorem prover.  In these systems the logical core is a library of their programming language.  Theorems represent new elements of the language and can only be introduced via "strategies" which guarantee logical correctness.  Strategy composition gives users the ability to produce significant proofs with relatively few interactions with the system.  Members of the family include:
HOL4 – The "primary descendant", still under active development.  Support for both Moscow ML and Poly/ML. Has a BSD-style license.
HOL Light – A thriving "minimalist fork". OCaml based.
ProofPower – Went proprietary, then returned to open source. Based on Standard ML.
Isabelle is an interactive theorem prover, successor of HOL.  The main code-base is BSD-licensed, but the Isabelle distribution bundles many add-on tools with different licenses.
Jape – Java based.
LEGO
Matita – A light system based on the Calculus of Inductive Constructions.
MINLOG – A proof assistant based on first-order minimal logic.
Mizar – A proof assistant based on first-order logic, in a natural deduction style, and Tarski–Grothendieck set theory.
PhoX – A proof assistant based on higher-order logic which is eXtensible.
Prototype Verification System (PVS) – a proof language and system based on higher-order logic.
TPS and ETPS – Interactive theorem provers also based on simply-typed lambda calculus, but based on an independent formulation of the logical theory and independent implementation.
Typelab
YarrowThe Theorem Prover Museum is an initiative to conserve the sources of theorem prover systems for future analysis, since they are important cultural/scientific artefacts. It has the sources of many of the systems mentioned above.


== User interface ==
A popular front-end for proof assistants is the Emacs-based Proof General, developed at the University of Edinburgh.
Coq includes CoqIDE, which is based on OCaml/Gtk.  Isabelle includes Isabelle/jEdit, which is based on jEdit and the Isabelle/Scala infrastructure for document-oriented proof processing.


== See also ==
Automated theorem proving
Computer-assisted proof
QED manifesto
Formal verification
Satisfiability modulo theories
Metamath – a language for developing formalized mathematics accompanied by a proof checker for this language and several databases of thousands of proved theorems.


== Notes ==


== References ==
Henk Barendregt and Herman Geuvers (2001). "Proof-assistants using Dependent Type Systems". In Handbook of Automated Reasoning.
Frank Pfenning (2001). "Logical frameworks". In Handbook of Automated Reasoning.
Frank Pfenning (1996). "The Practice of Logical Frameworks".
Robert L. Constable (1998). "Types in computer science, philosophy and logic". In Handbook of Proof Theory.
H. Geuvers. "Proof assistants: History, ideas and future".
Freek Wiedijk. "The Seventeen Provers of the World"


== External links ==
"Introduction" in Certified Programming with Dependent Types.
Introduction to the Coq Proof Assistant (with a general introduction to interactive theorem proving)
Interactive Theorem Proving for Agda Users
A list of theorem proving toolsCataloguesDigital Math by Category: Tactic Provers
Automated Deduction Systems and Groups
Theorem Proving and Automated Reasoning Systems
Database of Existing Mechanized Reasoning Systems
NuPRL: Other Systems
Specific Logical Frameworks and Implementations
DMOZ: Science: Math: Logic and Foundations: Computational Logic: Logical Frameworks