Milind Tambe is Gordon McKay Professor of Computer Science and Director of Center for Research in Computation and Society at Harvard University. Concurrently, he is also Director "AI for Social Good" at Google  Research India. He is a fellow of AAAI (Association for Advancement of Artificial Intelligence) and has received ACM SIGART Autonomous Agents Research Award.  In 2013 he became a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery. In 2018, he won  the IJCAI John McCarthy Award.Previous to his position at Harvard and Google, he was Helen N. and Emmett H. Jones Professor in Engineering and a Professor of Computer Science and Industrial and Systems Engineering at the University of Southern California, Los Angeles.Milind Tambe’s research focuses on advancing AI and multi-agent systems research for social good. Examples of topics he has worked on include: (i) AI for the protection of endangered wildlife, forests and fisheries;  (iii) AI for public health and social work; and (iii)  AI for public safety and security. His research focuses on fundamental problems in computational game theory, machine learning, automated planning, intelligent agents, and multi-agent interactions that are driven by these topics, ensuring a virtuous cycle of research and real-world applications. In terms of public safety and security, the security games framework that Prof. Tambe pioneered has been deployed and tested for security optimization, both nationally and internationally, by agencies such as the US Coast Guard and the Federal Air Marshals Service; and this framework is also at the basis of PAWS (Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security) that is in use by NGOs for protecting endangered wildlife. More specifically, his algorithms have been deployed by USA security agencies such as LAX police division,  the Federal Air Marshals Service, the US Coast Guard and the Transportation Security Administration.


== Bibliography ==
Security and Game Theory: Algorithms, Deployed Systems, Lessons Learned (1st edition) 2011. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 1-107-09642-1
Keep the Adversary Guessing: Agent Security by Policy Randomization 2008. VDM Verlag Dr. Mueller e.K., ISBN 3-639-01925-3


== References ==


== External links ==
Home page: Milind Tambe