Symbolic Systems (Sym Sys) is an interdisciplinary academic program at Stanford University focusing on computers and minds, specifically the relationship between natural and artificial systems that represent, process, and act on information. The program aims to prepare majors with the vocabulary, theoretical background, and technical skills necessary to research questions about language, information, and intelligence, both human and machine. Core requirements of the program include courses in symbolic logic, artificial intelligence, mathematics of computation, probability and statistics, programming, cognitive psychology, philosophy of mind, and interdisciplinary approaches to cognitive science.
The program offers both bachelor's and master's degrees. The undergraduate major is split into concentrations such as artificial intelligence, human-computer interaction, decision making and rationality, and neuroscience. Student advisors and the student-led Symbolic Systems Society provide support and organize events for the major. The program annually hosts special lectures by "Distinguished Speakers", where past speakers include Daniel Dennett, Steven Pinker, Edward Snowden, Nick Bostrom, and Marvin Minsky.The program's alumni include some of the biggest names in the tech industry, such as Reid Hoffman, Co-Founder of the networking service LinkedIn, Mike Krieger, Co-Founder of the social networking service Instagram, and Marissa Mayer, CEO at Yahoo!. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg stated that he believed its graduates to be "among the most talented in the world.” 


== Notable graduates ==
Chris Cox, former chief product officer at Facebook
Dalton Caldwell
Scott Forstall, former iOS lead at Apple Inc.
Reid Hoffman, co-founder of LinkedIn
Mike Krieger, co-founder of Instagram
Yul Kwon, product management director at Facebook
Marissa Mayer, chief executive officer at Yahoo!
Srinija Srinivasan, former vice president of Yahoo!


== References ==


== External links ==
Stanford University's Symbolic Systems Homepage
Arizona State University's Symbolic Systems Certificate