Anarcho-tyranny is a Hegelian synthesis of the two opposites anarchy and tyranny.


== History and definition ==
The term anarcho-tyranny was introduced by Samuel T. Francis in 1992.The National Review staff summarized the term in 2011 as "'anarcho-tyranny' describes that stage of governmental dysfunction in which the state is anarchically hopeless at coping with large matters but ruthlessly tyrannical in the enforcement of small ones." Francis described it as "the failure of the state to enforce the laws and, at the same time, [...] the criminalization of the law-abiding and innocent".


== Use and examples ==
Lew Rockwell wrote in 2003, referring to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, that such a state underscored "the primary focal point of the rule of every regime: to maintain and tighten its monopoly over the coercive powers of the state, while displacing and eliminating possible competitors to that position."Chilton Williamson, Jr. wrote in 2005 that anarcho-tyranny is about the consolidation and expansion of raw power rather than the realization of an ideological vision, and in that regard compared it to American capitalism in its postmodern form. He contrasted anarcho-tyranny to what he called libertine-Puritanism (or Puritan-libertinism), which he saw exemplified in the 1932 dystopian novel Brave New World, and to which power is secondary but that both anarcho-tyranny and libertine-Puritanism strive to accomplish tyranny and therefore intersect in matter of means.Francis argued that "Anarcho-tyranny is entirely deliberate, a calculated transformation of the function of the state from one committed to protecting the law-abiding citizenry to a state that treats the law-abiding citizen as, at best, a social pathology and, at worst, an enemy."David Kopel wrote in 2005 how New Orleanians were subject to anarcho-tyranny after Hurricane Katrina when lawfully-owned firearms were confiscated while the government of New Orleans failed to stop the looting. Mark Krikorian wrote in 2014 that the concept of anarcho-tyranny perfectly described how legal immigrants to the U.S. were penalized by the DACA immigration policy.When Francis died in 2005, his photo appeared on the cover of Chronicles: A Magazine of American Culture in the April issue "Anarcho-Tyranny: The Perpetual Revolution". and an article by Francis was published. The magazine has since revisited the subject multiple times by writers Srđa Trifković (2005), Thomas Fleming (2005 and 2014), Eugene Girin (2014), and John Seiler (2014). The term has also been used by for example Jerry Pournelle (2003), Kevin D. Williamson (2014, 2017 and 2019), Justin Raimondo (2017) and several other writers over the years.


== See also ==
Managerial state, a concept used in critiquing modern procedural democracy in Western countries


== References ==