"Bollocks to Brexit" is a meme and grassroots campaign slogan used by people opposing Brexit, following the result of a 2016 referendum. 
The slogan has received media coverage and legal attention, as well as being used by the Liberal Democrats.


== Merchandise ==
The phrase has been printed on yellow fluorescent stickers (reading "Bollocks to Brexit – It's not a done deal"), which have been prominently circulated and displayed on anti-Brexit marches, including the People's Vote march in London on 23 March 2019. The stickers have also been handed out at major political party conferences in the UK. The New European, a newspaper supporting Britain remaining in the EU, offers a free "Bollocks to Brexit" mug with a subscription.A "Bollocks to Brexit" bus, parodying the Vote Leave campaign bus that appeared during the 2016 referendum, has toured the UK and Ireland. The bus visited Maidenhead, Islington and Uxbridge, constituencies of the Prime Minister Theresa May, leader of the opposition Jeremy Corbyn and Vote Leave campaigner Boris Johnson, respectively. It was inadvertently shown on television after it appeared in the background of an ITV News broadcast.In the run-up to the 2019 EU elections, the Liberal Democrats leader Vince Cable adopted the phrase to be the title of their party manifesto. The party's newly elected MEPs wore the slogan on the back of T-shirts at the opening of European Parliament.


== Controversy ==
The phrase, and merchandise featuring it, has attracted legal attention. In March 2018, the Speaker of the House of Commons, John Bercow was criticised by the Conservative MP and Leave Means Leave advocate Andrew Bridgen for appearing to display a "Bollocks to Brexit" sign in his car. Bercow said that the car belonged to his wife Sally and he could not be held directly responsible for her thoughts and opinions. In October 2018, Charlie Mullins, founder of Pimlico Plumbers and former Conservative Party donor, was ordered by the local council to take down a large "Bollocks to Brexit" sign on top of a company building in Waterloo, London. Commuters complained that the sign was distracting and irrelevant to the business, but Mullins defended his right to free speech and as of March 2019 the sign remained in place.In March 2019, a man was detained at Gatwick Airport after he refused to remove a "Bollocks to Brexit" badge upon attempting to board a flight. The same month, a protester on the People's Vote march attached a "Bollocks to Brexit" sticker to the front nameplate of the Department for International Trade office in Whitehall in protest at the department secretary, Liam Fox. A woman was refused entrance to the Adelphi Theatre because she was wearing a "Bollocks to Brexit" badge.


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
EU Flag Mafia - marketer of "Bollocks to Brexit" stickers