The Czech and Slovak Transatlantic Award (CSTA)  is an original initiative of the Jagello 2000 Association for Euro-Atlantic Cooperation from the Czech Republic and implemented jointly by Jagello 2000 and the Slovak Atlantic Commission since 2012.

 Within this initiative, the two organizations annually recognize personalities, who have substantially contributed to freedom and democracy in Central Europe, to strengthening of the transatlantic relations and integration of Central Europe to Euro-Atlantic Institutions. The Awards are presented two times a year – in Spring in Slovakia at the GLOBSEC Bratislava Global Security Forum and in Autumn at the NATO Days in Ostrava & Czech Air Force Days in Ostrava, Czech Republic. The awardees are Czech, Slovak and international diplomatic and military personalities.


== Honorary Committee ==
The CSTA awardees are chosen by the Honorary Committee, created for this purpose from distinguished personalities from the diplomatic, political and military areas of the Czech and Slovak Republics. Members of the Honorary Committee are:
Mikuláš Dzurinda, Former Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of Slovakia
Ján Figeľ, Special Envoy for the Promotion of the Freedom of Religion or Belief outside the European Union, Former Member of the European Commission
Štefan Füle, Chairman of the Administrative Board of the Czech China Chamber of Cooperation in Prague, Former European Commissioner for Enlargement and European Neighbourhood Policy
Rastislav Káčer, Chairman of Globsec, President of the Slovak Atlantic Commission
Jan Kohout, President of New Silk Road Institute Prague, Former Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic
Amb. Ivan Korčok, Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the Slovak Republic to the United States, State Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs of the Slovak Republic
Gen. Pavel Macko, Former First Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Slovak Republic
Zbyněk Pavlačík, CEO & Co-Founder of Jagello 2000
Martin Povejšil, Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs for Security and Multilateral Issues, Former Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic to the European Union
Jiří Schneider, Executive Director of the Aspen Institute Central Europe, Former First Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic
Gen. (Ret). Jiří Šedivý, Former Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Czech Republic
Maroš Šefčovič, Vice President of the European Commission, European Commissioner for the Energy Union


== List of Awardees ==


== Artist's design ==
Original creation of the renowned Slovak glass-designer Patrik Illo, the Czech and Slovak Transatlantic Award symbolizes the transatlantic link by opposite side edges through transparent glass.


== References ==