The Dark Enlightenment, sometimes abbreviated NRx, is an anti-democratic, anti-egalitarian, reactionary philosophy founded by English philosopher Nick Land and Curtis Yarvin, an American software engineer and blogger. The ideology generally rejects whig historiography — the concept that history shows an inevitable progression towards greater liberty and enlightenment, culminating in liberal democracy and constitutional monarchy — in favor of a return to traditional societal constructs and forms of government, including  monarchism and other archaic forms of leadership such as a cameralism.In 2007 and 2008, Curtis Yarvin, writing under the pen name Mencius Moldbug, articulated what would develop into Dark Enlightenment thinking. Yarvin's theories were elaborated and expanded by Nick Land, who first coined the term Dark Enlightenment in his essay of the same name. The term Dark Enlightenment refers to the Age of Enlightenment, in a pejorative sense.In July 2010, Arnold Kling, an adjunct scholar at the Cato Institute, coined the term "neo-reactionaries" to describe Yarvin and his followers.


== Overview ==
Neo-reactionaries are an informal community of bloggers and political theorists who have been active since the 2000s. Steve Sailer and Hans-Hermann Hoppe are contemporary forerunners of the ideology, which also draws influence from philosophers such as Thomas Carlyle and Julius Evola.Central to Land's ideas is a belief in freedom's incompatibility with democracy. Land drew inspiration from libertarians such as Peter Thiel, as indicated in his essay The Dark Enlightenment. The Dark Enlightenment has been described by journalists and commentators as alt-right and neo-fascist. A 2016 article in New York magazine notes that "Neoreaction has a number of different strains, but perhaps the most important is a form of post-libertarian futurism that, realizing that libertarians aren't likely to win any elections, argues against democracy in favor of authoritarian forms of government."Neo-reactionaries often decline to speak to reporters. When approached by The Atlantic political affairs reporter Rosie Gray, Yarvin attempted to troll her on twitter, and blogger Nick B. Steves insulted her IQ.


== Relation to the alt-right ==
Some consider the Dark Enlightenment part of the alt-right, its theoretical branch. The Dark Enlightenment has been labelled neo-fascist and "an acceleration of capitalism to a fascist point". Land disputes this, saying that fascism "is a mass anti-capitalist movement."Journalist and pundit James Kirchick says that although neo-reactionary thinkers disdain the masses and claim to despise populism and people more generally, what ties them to the rest of the alt-right is their unapologetically racist element, their shared misanthropy and their resentment of mismanagement by the ruling elites.


== Criticism ==
A criticism of neo-reaction is that its pessimistic appraisal of democracy dismisses many advances that have been made and that global manufacturing patterns also limit the economic independence that sovereign states can have from one another.


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Land, Nick. "The Dark Enlightenment".