Delaying tactic is a deliberate action to guide decisions to achieve beneficial outcomes, by delaying a decision, or an occurrence. or by slowing it down to win an advantage. Many governments, and organizations are accused of applying such tactics, some examples of delaying tactics are:
Active silence: The negotiator uses silence skillfully to induce a targeted discomfort in the other parties.
Bigger picture: The negotiator makes light of the proposed issue, and turns the focus to a wider discussion.
Bluff: The negotiator makes a false claim, as if he has better offers from other parties.
Bogeyman: The negotiator introduces a false threat or warning.
Changing the Negotiator: The negotiator is changed to reset the progression made thus far.
Control the Agenda: The negotiator controls the agenda, and the priorities to control what is discussed and when.
Divide and conquer: The negotiator creates an internal conflict between other parties who are opposed to them.
Ellsberg paradox or also ambiguity aversion: The negotiator uses the human bias toward choosing the option that they know more about, despite of its real merits.
Empty Promises: The negotiator makes promises that they know they will not keep.
Feather ruffling: The negotiator utilizes personal attack to divert the discussion to the involved parties instead of the results.
Fragmentation: The negotiator breaks the discussion into minor discussions.
Introducing a new issue: The negotiator introduces a new issue during the negotiation for distraction.
Late objections: The negotiator makes an objection late in the negotiation, to set it back to square one.
Limited Authority, or Missing person tactic: The negotiator declares their limited ability to make a decision.
Logrolling: The negotiator concedes on low-priority items to them.
Overwhelming: The negotiator provides other parties with too much requests or information to overload them.
Questioning goals: The negotiator debates the value of other parties' ultimate goals.
Phasing: The negotiator offers to phase in or out the requested changes, buying themselves more time.
Playing Dumb: The negotiator acts stupid to avoid confrontations.
Selective listening: The negotiator overlooks certain fragments of the other parties' argument.


== See also ==
List of logical fallacies
List of cognitive biases


== References ==