Disability studies is an academic discipline that examines the meaning, nature, and consequences of disability. Initially, the field focused on the division between "impairment" and "disability", where impairment was an impairment of an individual's mind or body, while disability was considered a social construct. This premise gave rise to two distinct models of disability: the social and medical models of disability. In 1999 the social model was universally accepted as the model preferred by the field. However, in recent years, the division between the social and medical models has been challenged. Additionally there has been an increased focus on interdisciplinary research. For example, recent investigations suggest using "cross-sectional markers of stratification" may help provide new insights on the non-random distribution of risk factors capable of acerbating disablement processes.
Disability studies courses include work in disability history, theory, legislation, policy, ethics, and the arts. However, students are taught to focus on the lived experiences of individuals with disabilities in practical terms. The field is focused on increasing individuals with disabilities access to civil rights and improving their quality of life.Disability studies emerged in the 1980s primarily in the US, the UK, and Canada. In 1986, the Section for the Study of Chronic Illness, Impairment, and Disability of the Social Science Association (United States) was renamed the Society for Disability Studies. The first US disabilities studies program emerged in 1994, at Syracuse University. The first edition of the Disabilities Studies Reader (one of the first collections of academic papers related to disability studies) was published in 1997. The field grew rapidly over the next ten years. In 2005, the Modern Language Association established disability studies as a “division of study.” 


== History ==
Universities have long studied disabilities from a clinical perspective. In 1986 the Section for the Study of Chronic Illness, Impairment, and Disability of Social Science Association was renamed the Society for Disability Studies and its journal "Disability Studies Quarterly" was the first journal in disability studies. The first US disabilities studies program emerged in 1994, at Syracuse University. However, courses and programs were very few. In the 1997 first edition of the "Disability Studies Reader" Lennard J. Davis wrote that "it had been virtually impossible to have someone teaching about disability within the humanities". In the second edition, written ten years later, he writes that "all that has changed", but "just because disability studies is on the map, does not mean that is easy to find".Still the field continued to grow throughout the 2000s. In 2009 Disability Studies Quarterly published a A Multinational Review of English-language Disability Studies Degrees and Courses. They found that from 2003 to 2008 the number of disability studies stand alone studies courses in the US, UK, Australia, New Zealand and Canada grew from 56 to 108 and the number of degree granting courses grew from 212 to 420. A total of 17 degrees in disability studies were offered, with 11 programs in the US, 2 in the UK, 3 in Canada, and one in Australia.A 2014 New York Times article "Disability Studies: A New Normal" suggests that the expansion in disability studies programs is related to the 1990 passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Those raised after the passage of the ADA have entered colleges and the workforce, as Disability Studies has grown. In a 2014 article, Disability Studies Quarterly published an analysis on the relationships between student run groups and disability studies, from 2008 to 2012. Their article analyzes groups at four different universities and describes how professors have incorporated student activism into their curriculum and research.


== Definitions ==
According to the transnational Society for Disability Studies:

"Using an interdisciplinary, multidisciplinary approach.  Disability sits at the intersection of many overlapping disciplines in the humanities, sciences, and social sciences.  Programs in Disability Studies should encourage a curriculum that allows students, activists, teachers, artists, practitioners, and researchers to engage the subject matter from various disciplinary perspectives.

Challenging the view of disability as an individual deficit or defect that can be remedied solely through medical intervention or rehabilitation by "experts" and other service providers.  Rather, a program in Disability Studies should explore models and theories that examine social, political, cultural, and economic factors that define disability and help determine personal and collective responses to difference. At the same time, Disability Studies should work to de-stigmatize disease, illness, and impairment, including those that cannot be measured or explained by biological science.  Finally, while acknowledging that medical research and intervention can be useful, Disability Studies should interrogate the connections between medical practice and stigmatizing disability.
Studying national and international perspectives, policies, literature, culture, and history with an aim of placing current ideas of disability within their broadest possible context.  Since attitudes toward disability have not been the same across times and places, much can be gained by learning from these other experiences.
Encouraging participation by disabled students and faculty, and ensuring physical and intellectual access. Prioritizing leadership positions held by disabled people; at the same time, it is important to create an environment where contributions from anyone who shares the above goals are welcome."


== Disability studies and medical humanities ==
The social model of disability is expanded to chronic illness and to the broader work of the medical humanities.  Practitioners are working towards improving the healthcare for disabled people through disability studies. This multi-disciplinary field of inquiry draws on the experiences and perspectives of people with disabilities to address discrimination. Infinite Ability has done some preliminary work in India to introduce disability studies to medical students.


== Intersectionality ==
Feminism introduces the inclusion of intersectionality in disability studies. It focuses on race, gender, sexuality, class and other related systems of oppression that can also intersect with having a disability. From a feminism standpoint, there is a large concern for grasping multiple positions and differences among social groups. Some research on intersectionality and disability has focused on the aspect of being part of two or more stigmatized groups and how these are contributing factors to multiple forms of harassment, the paradox known as "Double Jeopardy".


=== Race ===
Recent scholarship has included studies that explore the intersection between disability and race. Ellen Samuels explores gender, queer sexualities, and disability. Christopher Bell’s posthumous volume on Blackness and Disability; and the work of Robert McRuer both explore queerness and disability. These works engage with issues of neoliberal economic oppression. Scholars of Feminist Disability Studies include Rosemarie Garland-Thomson and Alison Kafer. The 2009 publication of Fiona Kumari Campbell’s "Contours of Ableism: The Production of Disability and Abledness" signaled a new direction of research — studies in ableism, moving beyond preoccupations with disability to explore the maintenance of abledness in sexed, raced and modified bodies. Similarly, recent work has focused on the intersections of race and ethnicity with disability in the field of education studies and has attempted to bridge Critical Race Studies with Dis/ability studies. Other contemporary works, such as literary studies conducted by critic Sami Schalk explore the intersection of dis/ability and race and the use of dis/ability as a metaphor within the genre of black women's speculative fiction. Collectively, these works reflect an effort to deal with complex histories of marking racially "othered" bodies as physically, psychologically, or morally deficient, and traces this history of scientific racism to contemporary dynamics. Empirical studies show that minority students are disproportionately more likely to be removed from class or school for "behavioral" or academic reasons, and far more likely to be labeled with intellectual or learning disabilities. The authors propose a union of critical race and disability studies, DisCrit, as an intersectional approach designed to analyzing the interaction between ableism, sexism, and racism.
In addition to work by individual scholars, disability studies organizations have also begun to focus on disability and race and gender. The Society for Disability Studies created the Chris Bell Memorial Scholarship to honor Bell's commitment to diversity in disability studies. Postsecondary disability studies programs increasingly engage with the intersectionality of oppression.  The University of Manitoba offers a course in on "Women with disabilities". Several recent masters' student research papers at York University focus on issues related to women with disabilities and people of African descent with disabilities.


=== Feminism ===
Feminism integrates the social and political aspects that makes a body oppressed while allowing empowerment to be present in acknowledging its culture. Rosemarie Garland-Thomson explains that these related systems of oppression pervades all aspects of culture by "its structuring institutions, social identities, cultural practices, political positions, historical communities, and the shared human experience of embodiment". Garland-Thomson further describes that "identity based critical enterprises have enriched and complicated our understandings of social justice, subject formation, subjugated knowledges and collective action". Feminism works towards accessibility for everyone regardless of which societal oppressive behavior makes them a minority. Although physical adjustments are most commonly fought for in disability awareness, psychological exclusion also plays a major role oppressing people with disabilities. Sara Ahmed elaborates the mental exclusiveness of privilege in "Atmospheric Walls", that there is an atmosphere that surrounds minority bodies which explains why an intersectionally privileged person could be made uncomfortable simply by being in the same room as a person of color, or in this case someone with a disability. Feminists and scholars also developed theories that put attention on the connection of gender and disability. Scholars like Thomas J. Gerschick argued that disability plays a big role on processing and experiencing gender, and people with disabilities often suffer stigmatization towards their gender, since their disabilities may make their body representation excluded by normative binary gender representation. Gerschick also argues that this stigmatization can affect the gendering process and self-representation of people with disabilities. Feminists also look into how people with disabilities are politically oppressed and powerless. Abby L. Wilkerson argues that people with disabilities are politically powerless because they are often desexualized, and the lack of sexual agency leads to the lack of political agency. Wilkerson also indicates that the erotophobia towards minority groups like people with disabilities further oppresses them, since it prevents these groups from gaining political power through sexual agency and power.


=== Gender and sexuality ===
The intersectionality of disability and LGBTQ communities is a more modern subject of study in which the relevance, historically, came about mostly in the 1960s and the 1970s with the surge of advocates in the midst of the vocal liberation and civil rights movements. These communities on their own are topics of numerous deliberations, however they also often link in significance in many ways. The significance of the movements however, began to build momentum and most legal recognition in the 1980s. It was from this age of advocacy that the intersectionality of these two minority groups came into a more clear focus, though it is one continuously growing subject of discussion. It was only in 1973 that the American Psychiatric Association removed homosexuality from their list of mental disorders. In addition to this, it was about forty years later in 2013 that the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) changed the listing of transgender to “gender dysphoria”.One of the most notable circumstances where the case of these two minority rights come together was the court case In re Guardianship of Kowalski, in which an accident that occurred in 1983 left a thirty-six year old Sharon Kowalski physically disabled with severe brain injuries. The court granted guardianship of her to her homophobic parents who refused visitation rights to her long time partner, Karen Thompson. The court case lasted nearly ten years and was resolved by granting Thompson custody in 1991. This was a major victory in the realm of gay rights but also called to attention the validity of rights for those who identified under the queer and disabled spectrum. Numerous support groups emerged from necessity to create safe spaces for those identifying in these specific minority groups such as the founding of the Rainbow Alliance of the Deaf in 1977, the Lesbian Disabled Veterans of America group in 1996 which then became the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender Disabled Veterans of America, and the San Francisco Gay Amputees group in 2006.
A 2012 study showed that disability was more common in LGBTQ individuals when compared to heterosexual peers. It was also shown that the LGBTQ group with disabilities were noticeably younger in age than the heterosexual group. There was a significant difference in the prevalence of mental and physical health between the study groups, a higher statistic of those with queer identities having issues health wise than those straight identifying, reportedly due to the weight of social pressure and discrimination of minority sexual identities.Though these minority groups do not always intersect, the way they handle their own discrimination, can be compared in similar ways.  It is also a large topic of discussion to say that both groups have to undergo the same kind of "coming out" process in terms of their sexual identity, gender identity, and disability identity because of the lasting social stigma. "Coming out" through sexual identity, gender identity, and disability identity is one example of "Double Jeopardy", as they are part of more than one stigmatized group.
Queer studies which emerged from women's studies, brings light towards the different kind of oppression queer and transgender people with disabilities have. For example, the Americans with Disabilities Act dismisses gender disphoria because of its moral case against transgender people. Queer studies are commonly associated with people with disabilities who identify as “Crip” and is commonly believed that queer politics must incorporate crip politics. Alison Kafer describes a first person experience of identifying queer and crip both reappropriated terms in Kafer's novel, "Feminist Queer Crip". Kafer describes the politics of the crip future and "an insistence on thinking these imagined futures - and hence, these lived presents - differently". Although many activists with disabilities find empowerment in appropriating the term crip, not all people with disabilities feel comfortable using that identity. There are many different terms used as an alternative to disability, for example Melwood, a nonprofit who uses the term "differing abilities", describes the label disability as  "a limitation in the ability to pursue an occupation because of a physical or mental impairment; a disqualification, restriction or disadvantage and a lack of legal qualification to do something, was an inadequate or limiting 'label' for a cross section of people". Because the term disability has a history of inferiority, it is believed by many that substituting the term will help eliminate the ableism that is embedded within it. Susan Wendell describes ableism in society "as a structure for people who have no weakness", this also applies to anyone who has any intersectional disadvantages. Feminism identifies these disadvantages and strategizes how to deconstruct the system that supports marginalizing specific groups of people.


=== Social class ===
Within class comes multiple avenues for intersectionality through disability. Disability looks different from a middle class, upper class, and lower class perspective, as well as through race, gender, and ethnicity. One's social class can contribute to when a person becomes disabled, rather it be sooner or later. For example, where there is poverty we will find disability. This poverty can include social, economic, and cultural poverty. Having a disability can contribute to poverty just as poverty can contribute to having a disability. People with disabilities are more likely to live in poverty and be unemployed than those who do not, resulting in lower socioeconomic status.


== Criticism ==


=== Questioning the social model ===
The International Association of Accessibility Professionals  recognizes six different models for conceptualizing disability: social, medical, cultural affiliation, economic, charity, and functional solutions. Once universally accepted in the field, the social model of disability  has recently been challenged. In a 2014 Disability Studies Quarterly article, students involved in campus disability groups note that they actively seek cures for their chronic illnesses and "question the rejection of the medical model" of disability. The cultural affiliation model accepts the person's disability completely and uses it a point of pride in being associated with other people in a similar condition. The economic model recognizes the effect of bodily limitations on a person's ability to work, and there may be a need for economic support or accommodations for the person's disability  while the charity model regards people with disabilities as unfortunate and in need of assistance from the outside, with those providing charity viewed as benevolent contributors to a needy population.  The functional solutions model of disability is a practical perspective that identifies the limitations (or "functional impairments") due to disability, with the intent to create and promote solutions to overcome those limitations. The primary task is to eliminate, or at least reduce, the impact of the functional limitations of the body through technological or methodological innovation. The pragmatism of the functional solution model deemphasizes the sociopolitical aspects of disability, and instead prioritizes inventiveness and entrepreneurship. This is the prevailing opinion behind compliance literature that promotes self-efficacy and self-advocacy skills for people with disabilities preparing for transition to independent living.


=== Exclusion of cognitive and mental disabilities ===
There is discourse within disability studies to analyze the construction of mental illness. However, few post-structuralist disability scholars have focused their attention to impairments of the mind. According to Carol Thomas, the Reader in Sociology at the Institute for Health Research, Lancaster University, this may be because disability scholars have in the past considered only the barriers confronted by people with physical disabilities.  The experience of impairment, cognitive disability, and mental illness had been absent from the discussion.
It is unclear exactly which perspective of disability scholarship “psychological impairment” can fall under, and this has led to a hesitation on the part of scholars.  Scholars such as Peter Beresford (2002) suggest "the development of a 'social model of madness and distress'" which would consider impairments of the mind. Yet others may recommend the "embodied approach," to the study of mental illnesses.With the emergence of Crip theory this hegemony is being challenged. In "Feminist, Queer, Crip", Alison Kafer states "My goal is to contextualize, historically and politically, the meanings typically attributed to disability, thereby positioning “disability” as a set of practices and associations that can be critiqued, contested, and transformed."  


== Notable disability studies theorists ==
Peter Beresford
Michael Bérubé
James Charlton
Lennard J. Davis
Nirmala Erevelles
Vic Finkelstein
Rosemarie Garland-Thomson
Johanna Hedva
Laura Hershey
Eva Kittay
Simi Linton
Robert McRuer
Tom Shakespeare
Anne Waldschmidt
Irving Zola


== See also ==
Ableism
Accessibility
Cultural studies
Developmental disability
Future planning
Inclusion (disability rights)
Infinite Ability
List of disability studies journals
Matching Person & Technology Model
Social model of disability
Special education


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Albrecht, Gary L., ed. Encyclopedia of Disability (5 vol. Sage, 2005)
Barnes, C. and G. Mercer. Exploring disability [2nd edition]. Cambridge, Polity Press, 2010.
Bell, Christopher, ed. Blackness and Disability: Critical Examinations and Cultural Interventions (Forecaast Series). LIT Verlag Münster, 2011.
Ben-Moshe, L., Chapman, C., and Carey, A., eds. Disability Incarcerated: Imprisonment and Disability in the United States and Canada. Palgrave Macmillan, 2014.
Burch, Susan, and Paul K. Longmore, eds. Encyclopedia of American Disability History (3 Vol. 2009)
Burch, Susan and Michael Rembis. Disability Histories. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2014.
Campbell, Fiona K. "Contours of Ableism: The Production of Disability and Abledness", Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
Corker, Mairian and Tom Shakespeare.  Disability/Postmodernity: Embodying Disability Theory, Continuum, 2002.
Davis, Lennard J., ed. The Disability Studies Reader. Routledge 1997
DePoy, Elizabeth, and Stephen Gilson, Studying Disability:. Los Angeles, CA: Sage 2011.
Guter, Bob, and John R. Killacky, Queer Crips: Disabled Gay Men and Their Stories. New York: Harrington Park Press, 2004.
Johnstone, David. An Introduction to Disability Studies, David Fulton Publishers Ltd 2001
Linton, Simi. Claiming Disability: Knowledge and Identity. New York University Press, 1998.
Lopez; Casasnovas; Nicodemo (2016). "Transition and duration in disability: New evidence from administrative data". Disability and Health Journal. 9 (1): 26–36. doi:10.1016/j.dhjo.2015.07.006. PMID 26440555.
McRuer, Robert and Michael Bérubé. Crip Theory: Cultural Signs of Queerness and Disability (Cultural Front), NYU Press, 2006.
Nielsen, K. (2013). A Disability History of the United States. Beacon Press
Oliver, M. Understanding Disability: From Theory to Practice. New York, Basigstoke, 1996
Pothier, Dianne and Richard Devlin, eds. Critical Disability Theory: Essays in Philosophy, Politics, Policy, and Law (Law and Society Series), UBC Press, 2006.
Ronell, A. The Telephone Book: Technology, Schizophrenia, Electric Speech, University of Nebraska Press, 1989.
Siebers, Tobin Anthony.  Disability Theory (Corporealities: Discourses of Disability), University of Michigan Press, 2008.
Snyder, Sharon, Brenda J. Brueggemann, and Rosemarie Garland-Thomson, eds. Disability Studies: Enabling the Humanities. Modern Language Association, 2002.
Snyder, Sharon L. and David T. Mitchell. Cultural Locations of Disability, University of Chicago Press, 2006.
Smith, Bonnie G., and Beth Hutchison, eds. Gendering Disability. Rutgers University Press, 2004.
Thomas, C. Sociologies of Disability and Illness: contested ideas in disability studies and medical sociology, London, Palgrave, 2007.
Waldschmidt, A., H. Berressem and M. Ingwersen, eds. Culture – Theory – Disability: Encounters between Disability Studies and Cultural Studies, Bielefeld, transcript, 2017.
Withers, AJ. Disability Poilitics & Theory, Halifax, Fernwood, 2012.


== External links ==
Review of Disability Studies: An International Journal
Society for Disability Studies
Disability Studies Quarterly
National University of Ireland, Galway: List of Disability Related Academic Journals, with impact factors
Syracuse University Journals & Databases for Disability Studies