For Alternative Approaches to Addiction, Think & do tank (FAAAT), often shortened to FAAAT think & do tank, is an international non-profit organization created in 2015 and registered in France, with office in Paris (France). In May 2019 the organization started the process towards the discontinuation of its activities on 31 December 2019.
The aim of FAAAT to impulse and support research and ground-up policy alternatives in the field of addiction, drug use and substance abuse, and to enhance civil society interaction with policymakers at international level, through social engineering and collective action. According to their website, FAAAT supports "Transparent and measurable drug policies framed by fundamental rights, grounded on sustainable development, enforcing empowerment, social justice and health" and "supports the development of a legally controlled market for cannabis." FAAAT works both at the local level in several European countries, and develops actions close to the international institutions relevant on drug policy issues.


== Background ==
FAAAT's vision is that, from the local up to the international level, public policies related to controlled drugs should be transparent and measurable, framed by the Fundamental human rights of citizens, grounded on sustainable development, and that can empower the whole society while enforcing social justice and protecting health.
The think-tank part of FAAAT researches rigorous and ethical policy alternatives to the ones nowadays enforced, and take action through social engineering, collective action and advocacy for ground-up democratic reformers at all level.
The project FAAAT was started in August 2015, and legally registered in February 2016 by drug policy reform advocates that had been previously operating together at international level, in particular at the frequent meetings of the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. Most come from the French chapter of NORML, and the European Coalition for Just and Effective Drug Policies, but also from the US Veterans for Medical Cannabis Access.
The organisation collaborates with a large network of experts, contributors, professionals and public figures. FAAAT holds annual conferences at the regular sessions of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs, organizes exhibits, apart from being regularly present to lobby or deliver statements.


== Do-tank: Advocacy programs and actions ==
The organization claims two goals are structuring its actions (the so-called do-tank), "take action to ground the updates of international drug policy on sustainable development, human rights, transparency, and inclusiveness" and "strengthen peer groups, social movements and the nonprofit sector to increase knowledge, sustainability, effectiveness, and capacity for collective action on drug-related issues."

As such, FAAAT has been essentially active at the multilateral and international level (including at the European Union level). FAAAT has also supported local advocacy groups (such as the Catalan Network of People who Use Drugs CATNPUD, the rural cannabis farmers of the Ghomara and Senhaja people of the Moroccan central Riff or the French platform of NGOs for the reform of drug policies).
FAAAT also works to foster exchange of data and know-hows between politics, scholars and civil society stakeholders on drug-related policies and field practices.The organization follows-up the work of the United Nations and international organizations (such as the INCB, UNODC or WHO) and regularly addresses international policymakers on drug-related issues, in particular the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs through oral or written statements, by showcasing policy models or by organizing fora and symposia (such as the Legal Regulations fora or the International Cannabis Policy Conference at the United Nations).
The organization works closely with the official consultative bodies towards the United Nations: NYNGOC (New-York NGO Committee on Drugs) and VNGOC (Vienna NGO Committee on Drugs). FAAAT is also a founding member of the IMCPC (International Medical Cannabis Patients Coalition) and the Geneva Platform on Human Rights, Health and Psychoactive Substances.
More broadly, FAAAT holds a blog and informs media and local communities about key policy issues.


=== Conferences ===

Introduction to the Cannabis Social Clubs, United Nations, Vienna, March 2016 (In collaboration with NORML France, Nonviolent Radical Party, Fundación Renovatio, Regulación Responsable Spain and ICEERS).
Legal Regulations Fora, United Nations, Vienna, March 2017
The Right to Science and Freedom of Research with Scheduled Substances, United Nations, Vienna, March 2017 (In collaboration with the Government of the Czech Republic, MAPS, Associazione Luca Coscioni, Veterans for Medical Cannabis Access and ICEERS).
International Cannabis Policy Conference, United Nations and Austria Center Vienna, Vienna, December 2018 (In collaboration with Knowmad Institut, International Association for Cannabinoid Medicines, International Cannabis Farmers Association, Hemp Industries Association, Veterans for Medical Cannabis Access and ICEERS).


== Think-tank: Research on alternative drug policies ==
Although mainly focusing on international cannabis policy, the research department of FAAAT (so-called think-tank) claims to "impulse a modern approach to the categorification of "drugs": renew terminology, taxonomy & scheduling to review the biochemical paradigm of drug use" and pretends to "shift drug policies towards evidence and effectiveness: enhancing positive drug-related programs and actions from the ground."As such, five main axis of research appear:

A follow-up of geopolitical evolutions of international drug control policies and related agreements. During the preparations of the 2016 United Nations General Assembly Special Session dedicated to the world drug phenomenon, Kenzi Riboulet Zemouli, head of research of FAAAT, was the only personality in Spain to endorse the Drug Policy Alliance open letter to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, along with the former Director-General of UNESCO Federico Mayor Zaragoza and the former EU High Representative on common foreign and security policies Javier Solana. FAAAT also took part to the civil society mobilisations through different canals to raise awareness around that key UN summit.
An important work of the think-tank has been the research and analysis surrounding the WHO process of scientifically reviewing cannabis for purposes of scheduling under the international drug control Treaties where FAAAT has encouraged the WHO to take action, and fuelled civil society, researchers and physicians involvement in the process. According to the British Medical Journal, once the definitive results of the WHO reviews of cannabis for international scheduling was made public early 2019, FAAAT considered that the outcome was "positive" and "clearly acknowledges medical applications of cannabis and cannabinoids, reintegrates them into pharmacopoeias, balances harms and [effectively] repeals the WHO position from 1954 according to which ‘there should be efforts towards the abolition of cannabis from all legitimate medical practice.’".
FAAAT considers that drug policies that enforce prohibition violate a series of fundamental human rights. Research is also being undertaken on this topic, and leads to outputs such as the submission of contributions to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its numerous correlations with cannabis policies and laws, is the latest area explored by FAAAT research department.
Besides international policy, one of the important task of the organization has been to popularize ground-up, peer-based and locally oriented models of legally regulated drug markets, in particular through the promotion of Appellations of Origin to protect traditional farmers knowledge in producing countries, or the so-called cannabis social club model for consumer countries, through the edition of advocacy documents or the organisation of workshops within the United Nations on the broader modalities of application of such model.


=== Publications ===
FAAAT is registered as an editor at the French national registry, and showcases its publications on its website. Remarked publications are:

Cannabis & Sustainable Development. Paving the way for the next decade in Cannabis and hemp policy. Recommendations for the implementation of Cannabis policies aligned with international Human Rights standards, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the 2016 UNGASS outcome document. ISBN 979-10-97087-06-7. Full PDF available online
The Crimson Digest, Volume 1. Briefing on the international scientific assessment of cannabis: processes, stakeholders and history. ISBN 979-10-97087-06-7. PDF available online
The Crimson Digest, Volume 2. Analysis of the WHO cannabis reviews outcomes, and the INCB's report on Cannabis. ISBN 979-10-97087-07-4. PDF available online
ECDD40 Procedural, methodological and terminological bias. Joint Civil Society Contribution to the 40th Meeting of the WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence. ISBN s/n.
Cannabis Social Club: Policy for the XXIst century. English: ISBN 979-10-97087-11-1, French: ISBN 979-10-97087-12-8, Spanish: ISBN 979-10-97087-13-5.


== Civil society partners ==


== See also ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
FAAAT on the European Union transparency register
FAAAT on the UNODC post-UNGASS follow-up stakeholders portal