A favorite son (or a favorite daughter) is a political term.

At the quadrennial American national political party conventions, a state delegation sometimes nominates and votes for a candidate from the state, or less often from the state's region, who is not a viable candidate. The technique allows state leaders to negotiate with leading candidates in exchange for the delegation's support. The technique was widely used in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Since nationwide campaigns by candidates and binding primary elections have replaced brokered conventions, the technique has fallen out of use, as party rule changes in the early 1970s required candidates to have nominations from more than one state.
A politician whose electoral appeal derives from her or his native state, rather than her or his political views is called a "favorite son". For example, in the United States, a presidential candidate will usually win the support of his or her home state(s).
Especially in parliamentary systems, a "favorite son" is a party member to whom the party leadership is likely to assign a prominent role, for example, Paul Martin while Jean Chrétien was the Prime Minister of Canada, or Gordon Brown while Tony Blair was the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom.


== See also ==
List of major-party United States presidential candidates who lost their home state


== References ==

Sabato, Larry J.; Ernst, Howard R. (14 May 2014). Encyclopedia of American Political Parties and Elections. Infobase Publishing – via Google Books.
Elliot, Jeffrey M.; Ali, Sheikh R. (1 September 2007). The Presidential-Congressional Political Dictionary. Wildside Press LLC – via Google Books.
Harris, Joseph P. (1961). California Politics 3rd Edition. Stanford University Press – via Google Books.
Safire, William (14 November 2017). "Safire's Political Dictionary". Oxford University Press – via Google Books.
Kamarck, Elaine C. (1 December 2009). Primary Politics: How Presidential Candidates Have Shaped the Modern Nominating System. Brookings Institution Press – via Google Books.