Conservation is a positive endeavour  including “… the preservation, maintenance, sustainable  use, restoration, and enhancement  of the natural environment”.Protected Area is "“...a  clearly defined geographical space,  recognised, dedicated and managed, through legal or other effective means,  to achieve the long-term conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values”. This IUCN definition applies  equally to land, inland waters and coastal and marine territories and areas  and is widely considered  to be equivalent to the CBD definition.
Governance is (the process of) “…interactions among structures, processes and traditions that determine how power and responsibilities are exercised, how decisions are taken and how citizens or other stakeholders have their say…”. In less elegant, but possibly clearer words, governance is about taking decisions and ensuring the conditions for their effective implementation. It is the process of developing and exercising authority and responsibility over time. It is about who takes decisions, and how, including in relation to learning processes and evolving institutions in society.
Governance is related to management but different from it. What is the difference? Management is about what is done in pursuit of given objectives. Governance is about who decides about what is to be done, and how those decisions are taken. It is about who holds power, authority and responsibility and who is, or should be, held accountable. Governance is nothing new: someone, somewhere, has always  been taking decisions  about  protected and conserved areas. What is new is that we are now paying  better attention to governance, adding visibility, articulating concepts, and monitoring and evaluating  practice. There is no ideal governance setting for protected  or conserved areas, but a set of “good  governance” principles  can  always  be taken into account. Governance is appropriate only when tailored  to its specific context and effective in delivering lasting conservation  results, livelihood benefits and the respect  of rights.


== Why governance? ==
Governance can be  improved and provide precious help  in facing  on-going challenges and global change. 

Governance is the variable  with greatest  potential  to affect conservation coverage.
Governance is a main factor in determining the effectiveness and efficiency of management.
Governance is a determinant  of appropriateness and equity of decisions.
Governance can  ensure that protected  areas are better embedded in society.


== Governance at the IUCN World Parks Congress ==
The IUCN World Parks Congress is held once every decade. Since the Congress in Durban (2003), governance has been a recurring stream in the deliberations of the Congress. Governance was also a major stream at the IUCN World Parks Congress 2014. The stream, among other things, published a primer to develop a basic lexicon in the hope that speaking “a common language” may help to better communicate and develop concepts of increasing clarity and meaning.


== Governance Diversity ==
We speak of governance  diversity for protected and conserved areas  when decisions are made by a variety of actors who enrich and strengthen conservation in practice.  For instance, a national system of protected areas  can “enhance  governance  diversity” by including in the system areas  governed by different types of actors and under different arrangements,  and/or by providing better recognition and support to conserved territories and areas  outside the system.


=== Four main governance types ===
The IUCN and CBD distinguish four broad governance types for protected and conserved areas according to the actors who take or took the fundamental decisions about them (e.g. the actors that “established” them and decided their main purpose and management).
The four main governance types are:

Type A. governance by government (at various levels and possibly combining various agencies)
Type B. governance by various rightsholders and stakeholders together (shared governance)
Type C. governance by private individuals and organizations (usually the landholders)
Type D. governance by indigenous peoples and/or local communities (often referred to as ICCAs)


=== ICCAs ===
ICCAs is an abbreviation that refers to the territories and  areas conserved  by indigenous peoples  and  local communities. There are three essential characteristics common to ICCAs:
an indigenous people  or local community possesses a close and  profound  relation with a site (territory, area or habitat)
the people  or community is the major player  in decision- making related  to the site and  has de facto and/or de jure capacity to develop  and  enforce  regulations
the people’s or community’s decisions and efforts lead to the conservation of biodiversity, ecological functions and associated cultural values, regardless  of original or primary motivationsManagement categories and governance types are independent and can be juxtaposed in the “IUCN Matrix”, visualizing a spectrum of area-based options to conserve nature in a given region/ system. The IUCN Matrix can be used to situate protected areas but also conserved territories and areas (the management category, in such case, would not correspond to a key objective but to an observed result).
Conservation depends on well governed systems of protected  and  conserved  areas in the landscape and  seascape and systems  are  made  stronger  by governance  diversity.


=== Conserved Territories or Areas ===
Conserved  territories or areas are  “…area-based measure  that— regardless of recognition  and dedication and  at times even regardless of explicit and  conscious  management practices—  achieve conservation de facto and/or is in a positive conservation trend and  likely to maintain this trend in the long term…”.  This definition applies  equally to land,  inland  waters  and coastal  and  marine territories and  areas.
The governance types apply  to both protected  areas and  conserved territories and  areas that are  NOT recognised as “protected” by the IUCN or any specific national  government.  In this sense,  the terms “Privately Conserved  Areas”  and  “ICCAs” encompass extents of land, inland waters and  coastal  and  marine  territories and  areas that go beyond  those recognised as “protected” by either national  government  or the IUCN.


=== Voluntary and ancillary conservation ===
Many systems of land and  water  management support high levels of biodiversity,  including critical biodiversity,  outside the formal system of protected  areas, in sites such a tourism and commercial hunting reserves,  private  estates  or village forests. The term voluntary  conservation  captures the idea  that those who exercise governance do so consciously and  without restriction, in ways that are  fully compatible with conserving biodiversity values while they may or not see conservation as the primary objective  of their management efforts. In other cases, as in military no-go areas or areas abandoned after a natural or man-made  disaster,  the term ancillary conservation is more appropriate, since conservation is an entirely unintended (though welcome) consequence of management for other purposes.
Conservation in the landscape and  seascape is the result of various area-based and  non-area- based measures. Among area-based measures  we find both protected  areas and  conserved territories and areas. Crucially, those should be biologically,  but also socially, well connected.


=== Systems of protected  and conserved  areas ===
A well-functioning  system of  protected   and  conserved  areas is complete and well-connected in conserving  the representative features  and  functions of nature  in a given environment.


=== Other effective area- based conservation measures (OECMs) ===
The term “other effective area-based conservation measures”– abbreviated as OECMs—is used by the Convention on Biological Diversity to refer to territories and areas that are  effectively conserved but not part of the official protected  area system of a given country. In this sense,  OECMs can  be seen as “clearly defined  geographical space where  de facto conservation of nature  and  associated ecosystem services and  cultural values is achieved and  expected to be maintained in the long-term regardless of specific recognition  and  dedication”  (11). OECMs can include the following:

Primary voluntary conservation that the national  government  does  not wish to recognise as a protected  area
Primary voluntary conservation that refuses the protected  area label and/or inclusion in the national  system (e.g.  because of self- determination  and  self-governance  issues)
Secondary voluntary conservation
Ancillary conservation with a reasonable expectation to be maintained in the long-termThe following Table summarises  various ways of classifying conservation efforts and  results:


== Governance quality ==


=== IUCN principles  of good governance for protected  areas ===
We  speak  of governance quality when decisions  are  made  while respecting the “good governance” principles developed through time by a variety of peoples, nations  and  UN agencies. A simple and compact  formulation of the “IUCN principles  of good  governance for protected  areas”,  includes:

Legitimacy and  voice— i.e. enjoying broad acceptance and appreciation in society; ensuring procedural rights of access  to information, participation  and justice; fostering engagement and  diversity; preventing  discrimination; fostering subsidiarity, mutual respect,  dialogue, consensus  and  agreed rules…
Direction— i.e. following an inspiring and  consistent strategic  vision grounded on agreed values and  an appreciation of complexities; ensuring consistency with policy and practice  at various levels; ensuring clear answers  to contentious questions;  ensuring proper  adaptive management and  favouring the emergence of champions  and  tested innovations…
Performance—i.e. achieving  conservation  and  other objectives as planned; promoting a culture of learning;  engaging in advocacy and  outreach;  being  responsive  to the needs  of rightsholders  and  stakeholders; ensuring resources  and  capacities and  their efficient use; promoting sustainability and  resilience…
Accountability—i.e.  upholding  integrity and  commitment; ensuring appropriate access  to information and  transparency, including for lines of responsibility, allocation of resources,  and  evaluation  of performances; establishing  communication avenues  and encouraging feed-back  and  independent overseeing…
Fairness and rights—i.e. striving towards equitably shared costs and benefits, without adverse impact for vulnerable people; upholding decency and the dignity of all; being fair, impartial, consistent, non discriminatory, respectful of procedural rights as well as substantive rights, individual and collective human rights, gender equity and the rights of indigenous peoples, including Free, Prior and Informed Consent; promoting local empowerment in conservation…Thus, a “good governance” situation is one in which decisions  are  taken legitimately, competently,  fairly, with sense  of vision, accountability and  while respecting rights.


=== Equitable and effective governance ===
The IUCN good  governance situation can  also be summed up as “equitable and  effective governance”. The criteria of legitimacy,  voice, fairness and  (procedural and  substantive) rights contribute to equitable governance. The criteria of direction,  performance and  accountability lead  to governance that is effective.


=== Substantive and  procedural rights ===
Rights are  usefully distinguished  between substantive and  procedural. Procedural  rights, such as the rights to information,  participation and  access to justice, govern the process  of determining  and adjudicating substantive rights. In turn, substantive rights refer
to the specific powers  and  obligations of individuals and  collective bodies  under accepted customs and legislation.  They span  from basic human  rights (e.g. life, liberty) to material  and  financial rights under specific contractual conditions  (e.g.  access  to a given territory). Procedural  and  substantive rights deserve  respect  in relation to both protected
and  conserved areas and  territories


== Governance vitality ==
We  speak  of governance vitality when decision-making actors and  institutions are functional, responsive and  thriving, meeting their role and  responsibilities in timely and appropriate ways. Vitality is expressed  by several of these properties:

Integration and  connectivity —i.e. having abundant and  meaningful interactions with diverse actors, sectors and  levels of decision-making in society, including those interactions that characterise a system versus scattered  and  isolated single protected  areas, and those interactions that render  decisions effective through the generation of political, social and financial support…
Adaptability –i.e. being reflexive and  flexible, able to accommodate circumstances, integrate knowledge  from different cultures, learn from experience and  weigh options through dialogue, exchanges, experiment and  debate…  able to take rapid  and  meaningful decisions even under challenging  circumstances...
Wisdom —i.e. being aware  and respectful of the socio-ecological history and traditional worldviews, knowledge  and  values of the relevant environment and  communities; governing situations of meaningful scope  (e.g. regarding the size and  coherence of the units to manage, the number of actors to involve…) and  in line with solidarity rather than self-interest only (e.g. sharing benefits, avoiding  accumulation  and  waste,  keeping  in mind future generations); not only allowing, but fostering the engagement of as many relevant actors in society as possible…
Innovation and  creativity — i.e. openness  to new ideas,  ability to re-invent and  renew itself as only a living system does,  ability to conceive and  implement new solutions, support the emergence of new rules and  norms, respond  positively to change and continue to develop…
Empowerment  – i.e. being self-conscious, self-directed, willing and  capable of demonstrating leadership, such as by organizing timely responses  to emerging  environmental conditions, problems and opportunities… but also being self-disciplined and  self-critical, able to take on responsibilities in effective and  dependable ways…While governance diversity and  quality have  been  explored rather  exhaustively,  the concept of governance vitality has only recently been  identified for further consideration.  All governance properties  are  open  to enrichment and  debate.


== How does  governance improve? ==
The IUCN and  CBD have recently published a volume of Guidelines for assessing,  evaluating  and planning  for action with a view to improving governance for a system of protected  areas or a specific site. In both cases,  the methodology  begins with an analysis of the historical, socio-cultural, institutional and  legal contexts. It then proceeds with a spatial analysis of governance vis-à-vis the status of conservation of nature.  This requires a large,  territorial view of the region or area  under consideration, including an assessment of biological,  ecological  and  cultural values and  their potential association  with governance diversity, quality and  vitality. From that, valuable  lessons can be derived and  action plans for improvement can be drawn.
Globally, there remains a need to initiate such systematic governance assessments and evaluations processes in a range of contexts, with the aim and expectation that they will catalyze enhanced  diversity, quality and vitality. A structured programme of governance  assessments, supported by learning and capacity development networks is a short and medium term priority to strengthen both conservation policies and results.


== See also ==
Bennett, A.F., Linkages in the Landscape: The Role of Corridors and Connectivity  in Wildlife Conservation,  IUCN, Gland  (Switzerland)  and  Cambridge (UK), 1999.
Dearden, P., M. Bennett, J. Johnston, “Trends in Global  Protected  Area Governance 1992-2002”. In: Environmental Management, Volume 36,  July 2005, pp 89–100.
IUCN WCPA, Transboundary  Conservation:  A systematic  and integrated  approach, Best Practice Protected  Area Guidelines  Series,  Gland, Switzerland, 2014  (forthcoming).
Jaireth, H. and  D. Smyth, Innovative Governance, Ane Books, Delhi, 2003.
Kothari, A., “Protected  areas and  people: the future of the past”,  Parks, 17,  2:23-34, 2006. Stolton, S., K. Redford and  N. Dudley , The Futures of Privately Protected Areas,  Best Practice Protected Area Guidelines  Series Gland, Switzerland, 2014  (forthcoming).
CBD Secretariat http://www.cbd.int/protected/
ICCA Consortium: http://www.iccaconsortium.org/
IUCN-Global Protected Area Programme (GPAP) on Governance: www.iucn.org/pa_governance
UNEP WCMC  protected  area database http://www.protectedplanet.net/


== References ==