The Greater Middle East is a political term, introduced in the early 2000s, denoting a set of contiguously connected countries stretching from Morocco in the west all the way to Pakistan in the east. Various countries of Central Asia are sometimes also included. According to Andrew Bacevich in his book America's war for the Greater Middle East (2016), the career soldier and Professor Emeritus at Boston University states that this region is the theatre for a series of conflicts dating back to 1980, which heralded the start of the Iran–Iraq War. Since then, the U.S. has been involved in balancing conflicts amongst these culturally interconnected nations in order to further its interests in the region. The Greater Middle East is sometimes referred to as the "New Middle East" or "The Great Middle East Project".This term was more clearly defined to denote a specific region in the U.S. administration's preparatory work for the G8 summit of 2004 as part of a proposal for sweeping change in the way the West deals with the Middle East.
Former U.S. National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski stated that a "political awakening" is taking place in this region which may be an indicator of the multi-polar world that is now developing. He alluded to the Greater Middle East as the "Global Balkans", and as a control lever on an area he refers to as Eurasia.


== Countries and territories ==
 Afghanistan
 Algeria
 Bahrain
 Cyprus
 Djibouti
 Egypt
 Iran
 Iraq
 Israel
 Jordan
 Kuwait
 Lebanon
 Libya
 Mauritania
 Morocco
 Oman
 Pakistan
 Qatar
 Saudi Arabia
 Somalia
 Sudan
 Syria
 Tunisia
 Turkey
 United Arab Emirates
 Western Sahara (Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic)
 Yemen


== Countries sometimes included ==
 Armenia
 Azerbaijan
 Georgia
 Kazakhstan
 Kyrgyzstan
 Tajikistan
 Turkmenistan
 Uzbekistan


== See also ==
Muslim world
Demographics of the Middle East and North Africa
MENA
Project for the New American Century
Sykes-Picot
The Grand Chessboard
Arab world
The Great Game


== References ==


== External links ==
"Greater Middle East: The US plan"
"The Greater Middle East Initiative: Sea Island and Beyond (U.S. Senate)"
"Blood Borders: How a better Middle East would look"
A legacy of U.S. military failure in the Middle East over the past three decades"