Hassan bin Abdul Karim (born 1951; Jawi: حسن بن عبد الكريم) is a Malaysian politician. He is currently serving as Member of Parliament (MP) for Pasir Gudang constituency in Johor representing the People's Justice Party (PKR), a component party of Pakatan Harapan (PH) coalition since 2018. He was formerly the president of Malaysian People's Party (PRM).


== Political career ==
Hassan, a lawyer by profession, joined PRM in 1978 before rising to become its youth chief. In April 2005, Hassan was elected president of PRM by party members who were against former party leaders moving to merge the party with the National Justice Party to became the new PKR.Hassan resigned as president of PRM on 17 November 2009 and decided to join the PKR. This was following disagreements within party ranks of Hassan's proposal for the party to join the Pakatan Rakyat (PR) opposition coalition and rejection of his antagonistic idea this time of merging the party with PKR led by Anwar Ibrahim.During the 14th Malaysian general election (GE14), Hassan, for the first time after six tries having contested since the 8th Malaysian general election (GE8), successfully wrestled the parliamentary seat of Pasir Gudang from the United Malay National Organisation (UMNO), defeating then-Menteri Besar of Johor, Mohamed Khaled Nordin, in a four-corner fight. On 4 December 2018, Hassan was elected chair of the Federal-State Relations Select Committee, one of the Parliamentary Committees of Malaysia.Following Anwar's release from prison and return to the PKR presidency, Hassan was appointed PKR Johor state chairman in 2018. However, following multiple allegations from party quarters of nepotism due to some of the appointees being accused of being linked to Anwar, Hassan decided to refuse the offer to become PKR Johor chief on 14 December 2018. Later on 28 December 2018, he bolted and accepted the post. Hassan finally quit the position on 19 July 2019, citing differences with the Johor Palace.


== Controversy ==
On 16 November 2015, Hassan was charged at the Shah Alam Sessions Court with three counts of making seditious statements via his public Twitter account in which he was alleged to have criticised the Selangor Sultan Sharafuddin Idris Shah being abroad during Selangor Mentri Besar crisis in 2014. He was discharged not amounting to an acquittal by the Sessions Court in May 2018, following the prosecution’s decision to drop the charges. On 10 May 2019, he was finally granted a full acquittal on the sedition charges by the Shah Alam High Court.


== Election results ==


== See also ==
Federal-State Relations Select Committee
Pasir Gudang (federal constituency)


== External links ==
Hassan Abdul Karim on Facebook
Hassan Abdul Karim on Parliament of Malaysia


== References ==