Judenfrei (German: [ˈjuːdn̩ˌfʁaɪ], "free of Jews") and judenrein (German: [ˈjuːdn̩ˌʁaɪn], "clean of Jews") are Nazi terms to designate an area that was "cleansed" of Jews during The Holocaust.While judenfrei referred merely to "freeing" an area of all of its Jewish inhabitants, the term judenrein (literally "clean of Jews") was also used. This had the stronger connotation that any trace of Jewish blood had been removed as an impurity.


== Locations declared judenfrei ==
Establishments, villages, cities, and regions were declared judenfrei or judenrein after they were cleansed of Jews.

Gelnhausen, Germany – reported judenfrei on November 1, 1938, by propaganda newspaper Kinzigwacht after its synagogue was closed and remaining local Jews forced to leave the town.
German-occupied Bydgoszcz (Poland) – reported judenfrei in December 1939.
German-annexed Alsace – reported judenrein by Robert Heinrich Wagner in July 1940.
Banat, German-occupied territory of Serbia – reported judenfrei on 19 August 1941 in Völkische Beobachter (lit. People's Observer). On 20 August 1941 Banat was declared judenfrei by its German administrators.
German-occupied Luxembourg – reported judenfrei by the press on October 17, 1941.
German-occupied Estonia – December 1941. Reported as judenfrei at the Wannsee Conference on January 20, 1942.
German-occupied territory of Serbia / Belgrade – May 1942, reported in the SS-Standartenführer Emanuel Schäfer cable sent to the Reich Main Security Office in Berlin; Schäfer was the Der Befehlshaber der SIPO und des SD head at that time in Belgrade.
Vienna – reported judenfrei by Alois Brunner on October 9, 1942.
Berlin, Germany – May 19, 1943.
Erlangen, Germany was declared judenfrei in 1944.
Independent State of Croatia – April 18, 1944. reported judenfrei by Siegfried Kasche to Berlin on 18 April 1944 that "Croatia is one of the countries in which the Jewish problem has been solved".


== Modern usage ==


=== Israeli–Palestinian conflict ===
In the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, a fear among many Israelis which has been reflected by Israeli government officials such as Benjamin Netanyahu is that the proposed removal of Israeli Jewish settlements in the West Bank according to the wishes of Palestinian officials is tantamount to rendering these areas judenrein, or clean of Jews.
On July 9, 2009, Benjamin Netanyahu, in a discussion with the German foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier is reported to have said, using the Israeli terms of the area, "Judea and Samaria cannot be judenrein."In 1952 Pesach Lev, first mayor of Lod after it was resettled by Israelis, said that Lod was transformed from "a neglected Arab town that was judenrein to a 'Hebraic city'".


=== Islamic world ===

The depopulation of the Jewish communities from Arab and Muslim countries of the Middle East and North Africa has also been described as part of an effort to make them judenrein or judenfrei. Libya, Algeria, and Sudan are believed to have no remaining Jewish population, while Afghanistan has a single Jew, Zablon Simintov. Egypt, Iraq, Syria, and Tunisia have also seen huge declines in Jewish population. 
Dr. Peter Schotten wrote on the matter, saying "Arab states responded ruthlessly to the lost war and to the newly displaced Arab refugees by undertaking systematic and bold oppressive measures against their Jewish citizens.  Their citizenship was stripped, arrests and detentions took place, religious restrictions were imposed, freedom of movement was curtailed, assets were frozen and property seized, employment opportunities were closed off and Zionism was criminalized." Lyn Julius wrote in the Jewish Journal, "Only three years after the end of World War II, the members of the Arab League were bent on emulating the Nazis. They set about making the Arab Middle East judenrein (free of Jews). They applied Nuremberg-style laws, criminalizing Zionism, freezing Jewish bank accounts, instituting quotas, imposing restrictions on jobs and movement. The result was the mass exodus and spoliation of a million Jews." Israeli Defense Minister Avigdor Lieberman had said that just as the Palestinians want a judenrein Palestine, Israel will get rid of its Arabs.


== References ==