The Liberal Democrat Federal Conference (often referred to as the Liberal Democrat Conference) is an internal body of the Liberal Democrats, as of September 2018 the third-largest UK-wide political party in terms of both votes cast and seats in the British Parliament. The Federal Conference is the highest representative body of the Liberal Democrats, which is one of the few British political parties to use its annual gathering for voting and policy resolution. The event also features speeches from prominent party members and guests and an exhibition. There are also several fringe events, run by internal political groups such as Liberal Reform, Social Liberal Forum and Young Liberals, and a well-established late-evening entertainment revue known as the Glee Club.
The Federal Conference takes place twice per year, first as the Spring Conference, usually held in March and then the Autumn Conference, usually in September.  The first Federal Conference was held in Blackpool, in North West England, from 25 to 29 September 1988, with the most recent being the 64th Conference, held in Bournemouth, in Southern England, from 14 to 17 September 2019.
The Federal Conference is overseen by the Federal Conference Committee (FCC), which also selects motions and amendments for debates, runs Conference sessions and provides drafting advice and liaison. Its members are regularly elected and expected to be objective and fair in their selection of motions and amendments.The Federal Conference does not choose the Leader of the Liberal Democrats, who is instead elected by a party-wide ballot of all members, in a one-member, one-vote contest. The system has been in use since the party's inception in 1988, predating changes to internal party voting rules by both the Labour and Conservative parties. Neither Liberal Democrat MPs, nor any other internal party groups, have special voting rights over either party policy or in the election of the party Leader.


== Conference Access Fund ==
The Conference Access Fund provides financial support for both low-income and disabled attendees. It offsets the costs of accommodation, childcare and travel for those on low incomes. For example, it provides £50 per night accommodation support, on the understanding that the cheapest-available accommodation has been booked. It provided uncapped funding for disabled attendees. Members of the party directly contribute to the fund, and are described as having donated "with generosity". The funding is ring-fenced. Among the three largest UK-wide parties, the Liberal Democrats are unique in providing an Access Fund that defrays costs for low-income and disabled Conference attendees.


== Conference decision-making ==
Conference is the ultimate decision-making body of the Liberal Democrats. Every party member who attends Conference has the right to vote in policy debates, under a one-member, one-vote system. There are no 'weighted' votes reserved for local elected representatives, MPs, trade unions or for senior members of the party. A proposal can only become policy if Conference votes for it.


=== Elected Representatives ===
An Elected Representative is a person elected by their local Liberal Association or SAO (Specified Associated Organisation), to represent them at Conference.


=== Motions ===
A Motion is put forward before each debate, and must be submitted to the party's Federal Policy Committee at least eight weeks before Conference. These are then published in the Conference Agenda. Any party member can submit a motion, with the support of at least 10 local party members. Any party member can also speak either for or against a Motion. The debate ends with a vote, open to all members at Conference. If a Motion is passed, it automatically becomes Lib Dem policy. Emergency Motions can be submitted until a few days before the start of Conference.


=== Federal Policy Committee ===
The Federal Policy Committee researches and develops party policy and oversees its policy-making process. At Conference, it provides policy papers for debate and compiles the election manifestos for both the Westminster and European elections.The Committee elects a Conference Chair who is responsible for choosing speakers and trying to ensure balance between different viewpoints on the issues to be debated. He or she may also receive speaking requests from Elected Representatives and SAOs.


== List of all Liberal Democrat Federal Conferences (1988 to present) ==


== See also ==
Liberal Reform
Social Liberal Forum
Young Liberals
Conservative Party Conference
Labour Party Conference


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website of the Liberal Democrats
Liberal Democrats Flock Together