Makkal Needhi Maiam (translation: People's Centre for Justice), is a political party in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. The party was founded by Kamal Haasan. He launched it at a public meeting in Madurai on 21 February 2018. He also unveiled the party flag. The flag is symbolised by six interlocked hands, meant to represent co-operation between the Southern states of India (5 States and 1 UT). Their election symbol is a battery torch light.
Makkal Needhi Maiam has also launched a whistle blower mobile application named ‘Maiam Whistle’, open to public. This party is estimated to have around 5,500 office bearers at present.


== General Secretaries list ==
Kamal Haasan announced on August 14, 2019 at Chennai, The party appointed Five General Secretaries.


== Electoral performance ==


== 2019 Lok Sabha Election ==
For 2019 Indian general election he declared to contest on 40 seats included 39 of Tamil Nadu and 1 of Puducherry.
Initially, there was speculation that Kamal Haasan could ally with the Congress after the state Congress chief had hinted at it. A few days ago, a lesser known Republican Party of India had forged an alliance with the MNM.
Releasing the party manifesto and the second list of candidates of his Makkal Needhi Maiam or MNM at a function in Coimbatore, Mr Haasan said, "All candidates are my faces. I am proud being the chariot puller than being in the chariot".
Makkal Needhi Maiam's vote share in the 2019 Lok Sabha election was 3.72% (in the seats it contested). Makkal Needhi Maiam secured 15,73,620 votes of the 4,20,83,544 polled in Tamil Nadu. J. Ebenezer, who contested from the Kanyakumari constituency secured the fewest votes at 8,590 while the MNM vice president Dr. R.Mahendran contesting from the Coimbatore  constituency secured the highest number of votes by the party at 1,45,104. The party performed well in urban areas such as Chennai and Coimbatore, where it regularly polled upwards of 10% of the vote share and often secured more than one lakh votes, but it performed poorly in rural areas. Despite this, all the candidates lost their deposit.Makkal Needhi Maiam candidates lost there deposit in all the seats it contested in the 2019 Indian general election  but they came third in many urban constituencies through it feel behind the Naam Tamilar Katchi in  several rural constituencies and  Amma Makkal Munnetra Kazhagam in some constituencies behind  the DMK and AIADMK fronts came first or second in all constituencies.


== See also ==
List of Makkal Needhi Maiam candidates in the 2019 Indian general election


== References ==


== External links ==

maiam.com