The Mandate for Palestine was a Class A League of Nations mandate for British administration of the territories of Palestine and Transjordan, both of which had been conceded by the Ottoman Empire following World War I. The mandate was assigned to Britain in April 1920, after France's concession of the previously-agreed "international administration" of Palestine; Transjordan was added to the mandate after the Arab Kingdom in Damascus was toppled by the French. Civil administration began in Palestine and Transjordan in July 1920 and April 1921, respectively, and the mandate was in force from 29 September 1923 to 15 May 1948.
The mandate document was based on the principles in Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations of 28 June 1919 and the Supreme Council of the Principal Allied Powers' San Remo Resolution of 25 April 1920. The objective of the Class A mandates was to administer parts of the defunct Ottoman Empire "until such time as they are able to stand alone". The border between Palestine and Transjordan was agreed in the mandate document, and the approximate northern border with the French Mandate was agreed in the Paulet–Newcombe Agreement of 23 December 1920.
In Palestine, the Balfour Declaration's "national home for the Jewish people" was to be established alongside the Palestinian Arabs, who composed the vast majority of the local population; this requirement and others, however, would not apply to the separate Arab emirate to be established in Transjordan. The British controlled Palestine for almost three decades, overseeing a succession of protests, riots and revolts between the Jewish and Palestinian Arab communities. The United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine was passed on 29 November 1947, envisaging the creation of separate Jewish and Arab states operating under economic union with Jerusalem transferred to UN trusteeship. Two weeks later, Colonial Secretary Arthur Creech Jones announced that the British Mandate would end on 15 May 1948. On the last day of the Mandate, the creation of the State of Israel was proclaimed and the 1948 Arab–Israeli War began.
Transjordan was added to the mandate following a March 1921 conference at which it was agreed that Abdullah bin Hussein would administer the territory under the auspices of the Palestine Mandate. It was administered from Damascus by a joint Arab-British military administration after the war headed by Abdullah's younger brother Faisal, who was subsequently proclaimed king. Transjordan became a no man's land after the French defeated Faisal's army in July 1920 and the British chose to avoid a definite connection with Palestine. The addition of Transjordan was given legal form on 21 March 1921, when the British incorporated Article 25 into the Palestine Mandate. Article 25 was implemented with the Transjordan memorandum, which established a separate "Administration of Trans-Jordan" for the application of the Mandate under the general supervision of Great Britain, on 16 September 1922. In April 1923, five months before the mandate came into force, Britain announced their intention to recognise an "independent Government" in Transjordan; this autonomy increased further under a 20 February 1928 treaty, and the state became fully independent with the independence treaty of 22 March 1946.


== Background ==


=== Commitment regarding the Jewish people: the Balfour Declaration ===

Immediately following their declaration of war on the Ottoman Empire in November 1914, the British War Cabinet began to consider the future of Palestine (at the time, an Ottoman region with a small minority Jewish population). By late 1917, in the lead-up to the Balfour Declaration, the wider war had reached a stalemate with two of Britain's allies not fully engaged; the United States had yet to suffer a casualty, and the Russians were in the midst of the October revolution. A stalemate in southern Palestine was broken by the Battle of Beersheba on 31 October 1917. The release of the Balfour Declaration was authorised by 31 October; the preceding Cabinet discussion had mentioned perceived propaganda benefits amongst the worldwide Jewish community for the Allied war effort.The British government issued the Declaration, a public statement announcing support for the establishment of a "national home for the Jewish people" in Palestine, on 2 November 1917. The opening words of the declaration represented the first public expression of support for Zionism by a major political power. The term "national home" had no precedent in international law, and was intentionally vague about whether a Jewish state was contemplated. The intended boundaries of Palestine were not specified, and the British government later confirmed that the words "in Palestine" meant that the Jewish national home was not intended to cover all of Palestine. The second half of the declaration was added to satisfy opponents of the policy, who said that it would otherwise prejudice the position of the local population of Palestine and encourage antisemitism worldwide by (according to the presidents of the Conjoint Committee, David L. Alexander and Claude Montefiore in a letter to the Times) "stamping the Jews as strangers in their native lands". The declaration called for safeguarding the civil and religious rights for the Palestinian Arabs, who composed the vast majority of the local population, and the rights of Jewish communities in any other country.The Balfour Declaration was subsequently incorporated into the Mandate for Palestine to put the declaration into effect. Unlike the declaration itself, the Mandate was legally binding on the British government.


=== Commitment regarding the Arab population: the McMahon–Hussein and Sykes-Picot agreements ===

Between July 1915 and March 1916 a series of ten letters were exchanged between Hussein bin Ali, Sharif of Mecca and Lieutenant Colonel Sir Henry McMahon, British High Commissioner to Egypt. In the letters – particularly that of 24 October 1915 – the British government agreed to recognise Arab independence after the war in exchange for the Sharif of Mecca launching the Arab Revolt against the Ottoman Empire. The area of Arab independence was defined as "in the limits and boundaries proposed by the Sherif of Mecca", with the exception of "portions of Syria" lying to the west of "the districts of Damascus, Homs, Hama and Aleppo"; conflicting interpretations of this description caused great controversy in subsequent years. A particular dispute, which continues to the present, was whether Palestine was part of the coastal exclusion. At the Peace Conference, Prime Minister Lloyd George told Georges Clemenceau and the other allies that the McMahon-Hussein correspondence was a treaty obligation.Around the same time, another secret treaty was negotiated between the United Kingdom and France (with assent by the Russian Empire and Italy) to define their mutually-agreed spheres of influence and control in an eventual partition of the Ottoman Empire. The primary negotiations leading to the agreement occurred between 23 November 1915 and 3 January 1916, on which date the British and French diplomats Mark Sykes and François Georges-Picot initialled an agreed memorandum. The agreement was ratified by their respective governments on 9 and 16 May 1916. The agreement allocated to Britain control of present-day southern Israel and Palestine, Jordan and southern Iraq, and an additional small area including the ports of Haifa and Acre to allow access to the Mediterranean. The Palestine region, with smaller boundaries than the later Mandatory Palestine, was to fall under an "international administration". The agreement was initially used as the basis for the 1918 Anglo–French Modus Vivendi, which provided a framework for the Occupied Enemy Territory Administration (OETA) in the Levant.


=== Commitment to the League of Nations: the mandate system ===

The mandate system was created in the wake of World War I as a compromise between Woodrow Wilson's ideal of self-determination, set out in his Fourteen Points speech of January 1918, and the European powers' desire for gains for their empires. It was established under Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations, entered into on 28 June 1919 as Part I of the Treaty of Versailles, and came into force on 10 January 1920 with the rest of the treaty. Article 22 was written two months before the signing of the peace treaty, before it was known what communities, peoples, or territories were related to sub-paragraphs 4, 5, and 6. The treaty was signed and the peace conference adjourned before a formal decision was made.Two governing principles formed the core of the mandate system: non-annexation of the territory and its administration as a "sacred trust of civilisation" to develop the territory for the benefit of its native people. The mandate system differed fundamentally from the protectorate system which preceded it, in that the mandatory power's obligations to the inhabitants of the territory were supervised by a third party: the League of Nations. The mandates were to act as legal instruments containing the internationally agreed-upon terms for administering certain post-World War I territories on behalf of the League of Nations. These were of the nature of a treaty and a constitution, which contained minority-rights clauses that provided for the rights of petition and adjudication by the World Court.The process of establishing the mandates consisted of two phases: the formal removal of sovereignty of the state previously controlling the territory, followed by the transfer of mandatory powers to individual states among the Allied powers. According to the Council of the League of Nations meeting of August 1920, "draft mandates adopted by the Allied and Associated Powers would not be definitive until they had been considered and approved by the League ... the legal title held by the mandatory Power must be a double one: one conferred by the Principal Powers and the other conferred by the League of Nations." Three steps were required to establish a mandate: "(1) The Principal Allied and Associated Powers confer a mandate on one of their number or on a third power; (2) the principal powers officially notify the council of the League of Nations that a certain power has been appointed mandatory for such a certain defined territory; and (3) the council of the League of Nations takes official cognisance of the appointment of the mandatory power and informs the latter that it [the council] considers it as invested with the mandate, and at the same time notifies it of the terms of the mandate, after ascertaining whether they are in conformance with the provisions of the covenant."


== Assignment to Britain ==


=== Palestine ===

The discussions regarding assignment of control of the region began immediately after the war ended, continued at the Paris Peace Conference and at the February 1920 Conference of London; formal assignment took place at the San Remo conference in April 1920. There the Allied Supreme Council granted the mandates for Palestine and Mesopotamia to Britain, and those for Syria and Lebanon to France.The Hashemite delegation to the Paris Peace conference, led by Emir Faisal, had been invited by the British to represent the Arabs at the Peace Conference; they had wanted Palestine to be within the proposed Arab state, and later modified this request to an Arab state under a British mandate. His delegation made two initial statements to the Peace Conference: the 1 January 1919 memorandum referred to the goal to "unite the Arabs eventually into one nation", defining the Arab areas in the first memorandum as "from a line Alexandretta – Persia southward to the Indian Ocean" and the 29 January memorandum stated that "from the line Alexandretta – Diarbekr southward to the Indian Ocean" with boundaries of any new states being "matters for arrangement between us, after the wishes of their respective inhabitants have been ascertained" in a reference to Wilson's policy of self determination. In his presentation of 6 February 1919 to the Peace Conference, Faisal, speaking on behalf of King Hussein, asked for Arab independence, or at minimum the right to pick the mandatory. The Hashemites had fought alongside the British and received an annual subsidy from them; the confidential appendix to the report of the 1919 King-Crane Commission observed that "the French 'resent the payment by the English to the Emir Faisal of a large monthly subsidy, which they claim covers a multitude of bribes, and enables the British to stand off and show clean hands while Arab agents do dirty work in their interest."The World Zionist Organization delegation to the Peace Conference also asked for a British mandate, and asserted the 'historic title of the Jewish people to Palestine'. The confidential appendix to the report of the August 1919 King-Crane Commission observed that "The Jews are distinctly for Britain as mandatory power, because of the Balfour declaration." The Faisal–Weizmann Agreement was a 3 January 1919 agreement between Faisal and Weizmann,  signed two weeks before the start of the conference. Together with a letter written by T. E. Lawrence in Faisal's name to Felix Frankfurter in March 1919, it was one of two documents used by the Zionist delegation to argue that their plans for Palestine had the prior approval of Arabs.The French privately ceded Palestine and Mosul to the British in a December 1918 amendment to the Sykes–Picot agreement; this amendment was finalised in a meeting at Deauville in September 1919. Matters were confirmed at the San Remo conference, which formally assigned the mandate for Palestine to the United Kingdom under Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations. France required the continuation of its religious protectorate in Palestine but Italy and Great Britain opposed it. France lost the religious protectorate but thanks to the Holy See continued to enjoy liturgical honors in Mandatory Palestine until 1924 when the honours were abolished. As Chaim Weizmann subsequently reported to his WZO colleagues in London in May 1920, the boundaries of the mandated territories at San Remo were left unspecified, to "be determined by the Principal Allied Powers" at a later stage.


=== Addition of Transjordan ===

Under the terms of the 1915 McMahon-Hussein correspondence and the 1916 Sykes-Picot agreements, Transjordan was to be part of an Arab state or confederation of Arab states. In spring 1918, the British military retreated from Transjordan after their first and second attacks on the territory, in an indication of their political ideas about the future of the territory; they had intended the area to become part of an Arab Syrian state. The British subsequently defeated the Ottoman forces in Transjordan in late September 1918, just a few weeks before the Ottoman Empire's overall surrender.As discussed above, the three territories mandated at San Remo in April 1920 did not have their boundaries specified, to "be determined by the Principal Allied Powers" at a later stage; Transjordan was not mentioned during the discussions. Britain and France did agree on the East border of Palestine being the Jordan river as laid out in the Sykes-Picot agreement. During the same year, two principles had emerged within the British government: the first was that the Palestine government would not extend east of the Jordan, and the second was the government's chosen – albeit disputed – interpretation of the 1915 McMahon-Hussein Correspondence which proposed that Transjordan had been included in the area of "Arab independence" whilst Palestine had been excluded.

As regards Faisal's Arab Kingdom of Syria, at the Battle of Maysalun on 23 July 1920, the French removed the newly proclaimed nationalist government of Hashim al-Atassi and expelled King Faisal from Syria. The French formed a new Damascus state after the Battle of Maysalun, they refrained from extending their rule into the southern part of Faisal's domain, and the area of Transjordan became for a time a no-man's land, or, as Samuel put it: "left politically derelict".

Following the French occupation, the British suddenly wanted to know 'what is the "Syria" for which the French received a mandate at San Remo?' and "does it include Transjordania?". British Foreign Minister Curzon ultimately decided that it did not and that Transjordan would remain independent, but in the closest relation with Palestine. On 6 August 1920, British Foreign Secretary Earl Curzon wrote to newly-appointed High Commissioner Herbert Samuel regarding Transjordan, stating: "I suggest that you should let it be known forthwith that in the area south of the Sykes-Picot line, we will not admit French authority and that our policy for this area to be independent but in closest relations with Palestine." Samuel replied to Curzon, "After the fall of Damascus a fortnight ago...Sheiks and tribes east of Jordan utterly dissatisfied with Shareefian Government most unlikely would accept revival," and asked to put parts of Transjordan directly under his administrative control. Two weeks later, on 21 August, Samuel then visited Transjordan without authority from London; at a meeting with 600 leaders in Salt, he announced the independence of the area from Damascus and its absorption into the mandate, quadrupling the area under his control by tacit capitulation. Samuel assured his audience that Transjordan would not be merged with Palestine. Curzon was in the process of reducing British military expenditures and was unwilling to commit any significant resources to an area considered to be of marginal strategic value. Curzon immediately repudiated Samuel's action; on 26 August he sent, via the Foreign Office, a restatement of his instructions to minimize the scope of British involvement in the area – in particular stating that "There must be no question of setting up any British administration in that area". At the end of September 1920, Curzon instructed Vansittart to leave the eastern boundary of Palestine undefined, and to avoid “any definite connection” between Transjordan and Palestine, in order to leave the way open for an Arab government in Transjordan. Curzon subsequently wrote in February 1921: "I am very concerned about Transjordania... Sir H.Samuel wants it as an annex of Palestine and an outlet for the Jews. Here I am against him."On 21 November 1920, Abdullah, the brother of recently deposed King Faisal, marched into Ma'an at the head of an army of 300–2,000 men. Between then and the end of March 1921, Abdullah's army occupied all of Transjordan, without opposition from the British and with some local support.

The Cairo Conference was convened on 12 March 1921 by Colonial Secretary Winston Churchill, then Britain's Colonial Secretary, and lasted until 30 March; the conference was to endorse an arrangement whereby Transjordan would be added to the Palestine mandate, with Abdullah as the emir under the authority of the High Commissioner, and with the condition that the Jewish National Home provisions of the Palestine mandate would not apply there. On the first day of the conference, the Middle East Department of the Colonial Office set out the situation of Transjordan in the memorandum pictured above. On 21 March 1921, the Foreign and Colonial office legal advisers decided to introduce Article 25 into the Palestine Mandate in order to allow for Transjordan "its inclusion within the boundaries of Palestine".


== Drafting ==
Intended mandatory powers were required to submit written statements during the Paris Peace Conference to the League of Nations proposing the rules of administration in the mandated areas; the drafting of the Palestine mandate began well before the mandate was formally awarded at San Remo in April 1920, since it was evident after the end of the war that Britain was the favored power in the region. The mandate went through multiple drafts, beginning with the February 1919 Zionist proposals to the peace conference, a December 1919 "compromise" draft between the British and the Zionists, a June 1920 draft after Lord Curzon's "watering down", and the December 1920 draft which was submitted to the League of Nations for comment.


=== 1919: Initial Zionist-British discussions ===

The February 1919 Zionist Proposal to the Peace Conference was not discussed at the time, as the Allies' discussions were focused elsewhere. It was not until July 1919 that direct negotiations began between the British Foreign Office and the Zionists, following the production of a full draft mandate by the British. The British draft comprised 29 articles, compared to the 5 articles in the Zionist proposal. However the Zionist Organisation Report stated that a draft was presented by the Zionist Organization to the British on 15 July 1919.Balfour authorised diplomatic secretary Eric Forbes Adam to begin negotiations with the Zionist Organization. On the Zionist side, the drafting was led by Ben Cohen on behalf of Weizmann, Felix Frankfurter and other Zionist leaders. By December 1919 they had negotiated a "compromise" draft.


=== 1920: Curzon negotiations ===

Curzon, despite having taken over from Balfour in October, did not play an active role in the drafting until mid-March. Israeli historian Dvorah Barzilay-Yegar notes he was sent a copy of the December draft, commenting "...the Arabs are rather forgotten..." but that on receiving a draft of 15 March 1920, he was "far more critical" in particular objecting to "..formulations that would imply recognition of any legal rights.." for example, that the British government would be “responsible for placing Palestine under such political, administrative and economic conditions as will secure the establishment of a Jewish national home and the development of a self-governing Commonwealth …”. Curzon insisted on revisions until finally the 10 June draft satisfied his objections, in which the paragraph recognising the historical connection of the Jewish people with Palestine was removed from the preamble, and "self-governing commonwealth" was replaced by "self-governing institutions". Also, "The recognition of the establishment of the Jewish National Home as the guiding principle in the execution of the Mandate" was omitted.After strenuous objection to the proposed changes, the statement regarding the historical connections of the Jews with Palestine was re-incorporated into the Mandate in December 1920. The draft was submitted to the League of Nations on 7 December 1920, and was published in the Times on 3 February 1921.


=== 1921: Transjordan article ===
The inclusion of Article 25 was approved by Curzon on 31 March 1921, and the revised final draft of the mandate was forwarded to the League of Nations on 22 July 1922. Article 25 permitted the mandatory to "postpone or withhold application of such provisions of the mandate as he may consider inapplicable to the existing local conditions" in that region. The final text of the Mandate includes an Article 25 which states:

"In the territories lying between the Jordan [river] and the eastern boundary of Palestine as ultimately determined, the Mandatory shall be entitled, with the consent of the Council of the League of Nations, to postpone or withhold application of such provisions of this mandate as he may consider inapplicable to the existing local conditions, and to make such provision for the administration of the territories as he may consider suitable to those conditions"
The new article was intended to enable Britain "to set up an Arab administration and to withhold indefinitely the application of those clauses of the mandate which relate to the establishment of the National Home for the Jews", as explained in a Colonial Office letter three days later. This created two administrative areas, Palestine, under direct British rule, and autonomous Transjordan, under the rule of the Hashemite family from the Kingdom of Hejaz in present-day Saudi Arabia, in accordance with the McMahon–Hussein Correspondence of 1915. At discussions in Jerusalem on 28 March, Churchill proposed his plan to Abdullah that Transjordan would be accepted into the mandatory area as an Arab country apart from Palestine and that it would be, initially for six months, under the nominal rule of the Emir Abdullah. Churchill stated that Transjordan would not form part of the Jewish national home to be established west of the River Jordan:
Trans-Jordania would not be included in the present administrative system of Palestine, and therefore the Zionist clauses of the mandate would not apply. Hebrew would not be made an official language in Trans-Jordania and the local Government would not be expected to adopt any measures to promote Jewish immigration and colonisation.
Abdullah's six-month trial was subsequently extended, and by the following summer Abdullah had begun to voice his impatience at the lack of formal confirmation.


=== 1921–22: Palestinian Arab attempted involvement ===
The drafting was carried out with no input from any Arabs, despite the fact that their disagreement with the Balfour Declaration policy was well known.Palestinian political opposition began to organise in 1919 in the form of the Palestine Arab Congress, which had formed from the local Muslim-Christian Associations. In March 1921, the new British Colonial Secretary, Winston Churchill, came to the region to form British policy on the ground in the Cairo Conference; the leader of the Palestine congress, Musa al-Husayni, had tried to present the views of the Executive Committee in Cairo and later in Jerusalem, but was rebuffed on both occasions. In the summer of 1921, the 4th Palestine Arab Congress sent a delegation led by Musa al-Husayni to London, to negotiate on behalf of the Muslim and Christian population. On the way, the delegation held meetings with Pope Benedict XV and with diplomats from the League of Nations in Geneva, where they also met Balfour who was non-committal. In London they held three meetings with Winston Churchill where they called for reconsideration of the Balfour Declaration, revocation of the Jewish National Home policy, an end to Jewish immigration and that Palestine should not be severed from its neighbours. All their demands were rejected, though they did receive encouragement from some Conservative Members of Parliament.In 1922 Musa al-Husayni led a delegation to Ankara and then to the Lausanne Conference where, following Mustafa Kemal Ataturk's victories against the Greek army in Turkey the Treaty of Sèvres was about to be re-negotiated. The Palestinian delegation hoped that with Ataturk's support they would be able to get the Balfour Declaration and mandate policy omitted from the new treaty. The delegation met with Turkey's lead negotiator, İsmet Pasha, who promised that "Turkey would insist upon the Arabs’ right of self-determination and... the Palestinian delegation should be permitted to address the conference"; however, he evaded further meetings and other members of the Turkish delegation made clear their intention to "accept the post–World War I status quo". During the negotiations, Ismet Pasha refused to recognise or accept the mandates, and the mandates were not referenced in the final treaty, but this had no impact on the implementation of the mandate policy which had been set in train three years previously.


=== 1922: Final amendments ===
Each of the principal Allied powers had a hand in drafting the proposed mandate — although some, including the United States, had not declared war on the Ottoman Empire and did not become members of the League of Nations.


== Approvals ==


=== British Parliament ===
British public and government opinion became increasingly unfavourable to state support for Zionism; even Sykes had begun to change his views in late 1918. In February 1922 Churchill telegraphed Samuel, who had begun his role as High Commissioner for Palestine 18 months earlier, asking for cuts in expenditure and noting:In both Houses of Parliament there is growing movement of hostility, against Zionist policy in Palestine, which will be stimulated by recent Northcliffe articles. I do not attach undue importance to this movement, but it is increasingly difficult to meet the argument that it is unfair to ask the British taxpayer, already overwhelmed with taxation, to bear the cost of imposing on Palestine an unpopular policy.
Following the issuance of the Churchill White Paper in June 1922, the House of Lords rejected a Palestine Mandate that incorporated the Balfour Declaration by 60 votes to 25, following a motion issued by Lord Islington. The vote proved to be only symbolic as it was subsequently overruled by a vote in the House of Commons following a tactical pivot and variety of promises made by Churchill.In February 1923, following a change in government, Cavendish, in a lengthy memorandum for the Cabinet, laid the foundation for a secret review of Palestine policy:

It would be idle to pretend that the Zionist policy is other than an unpopular one. It has been bitterly attacked in Parliament and is still being fiercely assailed in certain sections of the press. The ostensible grounds of attack are threefold:(1) the alleged violation of the McMahon pledges; (2) the injustice of imposing upon a country a policy to which the great majority of its inhabitants are opposed; and (3) the financial burden upon the British taxpayer. ...
His covering note asked for a statement of policy to be made as soon as possible and that the cabinet ought to focus on three questions: (1) whether or not pledges to the Arabs conflict with the Balfour declaration; (2) if not, whether the new government should continue the policy set down by the old government in the 1922 White Paper; and (3) if not, what alternative policy should be adopted.Stanley Baldwin, replacing Bonar Law, in June 1923 set up a cabinet subcommittee whose terms of reference were:

examine Palestine policy afresh and to advise the full Cabinet whether Britain should remain in Palestine and whether if she remained, the pro-Zionist policy should be continued.
The Cabinet approved the report of this committee on 31 July 1923. Describing it as "nothing short of remarkable", Quigley noted that the government was admitting to itself that its support for Zionism had been prompted by considerations having nothing to do with the merits of Zionism or its consequences for Palestine. As Huneidi noted, "wise or unwise, it is well nigh impossible for any government to extricate itself without a substantial sacrifice of consistency and self-respect, if not honour." The documents relating to the 1923 reappraisal stayed secret until the early 1970s. 


=== United States ===
The United States was not a member of the League of Nations. On 23 February 1921, two months after the draft mandates had been submitted to the League, the United States formally requested that it be allowed to comment prior to consideration by the Council of the League of Nations; the Council agreed to this requirement a week later. These discussions did not conclude until 14 May 1922, when the United States government announced the terms of an agreement with the United Kingdom regarding the Palestine mandate. The terms included a stipulation that "consent of the United States shall be obtained before any alteration is made in the text of the mandate". Notwithstanding continued opposition from the State Department,
this was followed on 21 September 1922 by a congressional endorsement of the Balfour Declaration via the Lodge-Fish Resolution.On 3 December 1924, it entered into a bilateral treaty with Britain in the Palestine Mandate Convention, in which the United States "consents to the administration" (Article 1) and which dealt with eight issues of concern to the United States such as property rights and business interests. The US State department prepared a report documenting its position in this regard.


=== Council of the League of Nations: Mandate ===
On 17 May 1922, in a discussion regarding the date on which the question of the Draft Mandate for Palestine should be placed on the Agenda of the Council of the League of Nations, Lord Balfour informed the Council of his government's understanding of the role of the League in the creation of mandates. According to the summary in the minutes, he said that:

[the] Mandates were not the creation of the League, and they could not in substance be altered by the League. The League's duties were confined to seeing that the specific and detailed terms of the mandates were in accordance with the decisions taken by the Allied and Associated Powers, and that in carrying out these mandates the Mandatory Powers should be under the supervision—not under the control—of the League. A mandate was a self-imposed limitation by the conquerors on the sovereignty which they exercised over the conquered territory.
The Council of the League of Nations held meetings between Wednesday 19 – Monday 24 July 1922 to approve the "A Mandates" for Palestine and Syria (minutes of the meetings can be read here). The Palestine mandate was approved on Saturday 22 July 1922 in a private meeting of the Council of the League of Nations at St. James Palace in London, giving the British formal international recognition of the position they had held de facto in the region since the end of 1917 in Palestine and since 1920–21 in Transjordan. The Council stated that the mandate was approved and would come into effect "automatically" when the dispute between France and Italy was resolved. A formal public statement confirming this was announced by the president of the council on 24 July. With the Fascists coming into power in Italy, Mussolini delayed the coming into force of the mandates. On 23 August 1923 the Turkish assembly in Ankara ratified the Treaty of Lausanne by 215 votes out of 235.

The Council of the League of Nations determined that the two mandates had come into effect at its meeting of 29 September 1923. The dispute between France and Italy was resolved by the Turkish ratification.


=== Council of the League of Nations: Transjordan memorandum ===

Shortly after the approval of the mandate in July 1922, the Colonial Office prepared a memorandum to give effect to Article 25. On 16 September 1922, the League of Nations approved a British memorandum detailing its intended implementation of that clause, namely to exclude Transjordan from the articles related to Jewish settlement. On submission of the memorandum to the Council of the League of Nations, Balfour explained the background as recorded in the minutes: "Lord Balfour reminded his colleagues that Article 25 of the mandate for Palestine as approved by the Council in London on July 24th, 1922, provides that the territories in Palestine which lie east of the Jordan should be under a somewhat different regime from the rest of Palestine. ... The British Government now merely proposed to carry out this article. It had always been part of the policy contemplated by the League and accepted by the British Government, and the latter now desired to carry it into effect. In pursuance of the policy, embodied in Article 25, Lord Balfour invited the Council to pass a series of resolutions which modified the mandate as regards those territories. The object of these resolutions was to withdraw from Trans-Jordania the special provisions which were intended to provide a national home for the Jews west of the Jordan."


=== Turkey ===
Turkey was not a member of the League of Nations at the time of the negotiations; having been on the losing side of World War I, they were not to join until 1932. The decisions regarding mandates over Ottoman territory taken by the Allied Supreme Council at the San Remo conference was documented in the Treaty of Sèvres, signed on behalf of the Ottoman Empire and Allies on 10 August 1920. However, the treaty was never ratified by the Ottoman government, because it required the agreement of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. Atatürk expressed disdain for the treaty, and continued the fight known as the Turkish War of Independence. In November 1922, the Conference of Lausanne began, with the intention to negotiate a treaty to replace the failed Treaty of Sèvres. In the Treaty of Lausanne, signed on 24 July 1923, the Turkish government formally recognised the detachment of the regions south of the frontier agreed in the Treaty of Ankara (1921), thereby making a general renunciation of its sovereignty over Palestine.


== Key issues ==


=== National home for the Jewish people (Preamble and Articles 2, 4, 6, 7, 11) ===
The second paragraph of the preamble of the mandate document declared:
Whereas the Principal Allied Powers have also agreed that the Mandatory should be responsible for putting into effect the declaration originally made on November 2nd, 1917, by the Government of His Britannic Majesty, and adopted by the said Powers, in favour of the establishment in Palestine of a national home for the Jewish people, it being clearly understood that nothing should be done which might prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine, or the rights and political status enjoyed by Jews in any other country; 
Weizmann noted in his memoirs that he considered the most important part of the mandate, and the most difficult negotiation, the subsequent clause in the preamble which recognised "the historical connection of the Jews with Palestine". The British Foreign Secretary, Lord Curzon, together with the Italian and French governments rejected early drafts of the mandate because the preamble had contained a passage which read: "Recognising, moreover, the historical connection of the Jewish people with Palestine and the claim which this gives them to reconstitute it their national home..." The Palestine Committee set up by the Foreign Office recommended that the reference to 'the claim' be omitted. The Allies had already noted the historical connection in the Treaty of Sèvres, but they had not acknowledged a legal claim. Lord Balfour suggested an alternative which was accepted, and included in the preamble immediately after the paragraph quoted above:

Whereas recognition has thereby [i.e. by the Treaty of Sèvres] been given to the historical connection of the Jewish people with Palestine, and to the grounds for reconstituting their national home in that country;
In the body of the document, the Zionist Organization was mentioned once, in Article 4; in the September 1920 draft a qualification was added which required that "its organisation and constitution" must be "in the opinion of the Mandatory appropriate". A "Jewish agency" was mentioned three times, in Articles 4, 6 and 11. Article 4 of the Mandate provided for "the recognition of an appropriate Jewish agency as a public body for the purpose of advising and co-operating with the Administration of Palestine in such economic, social and other matters as may affect the establishment of the Jewish National Home and the interests of the Jewish population of Palestine," effectively establishing what became the "Jewish Agency for Palestine". Article 7 provided: "The Administration of Palestine shall be responsible for enacting a nationality law. There shall be included in this law provisions framed so as to facilitate the acquisition of Palestinian citizenship by Jews who take up their permanent residence in Palestine."The proviso to this objective of the mandate was that "nothing should be done which might prejudice the civil and religious rights of existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine".


=== Religious and communal issues (Articles 13–16 and 23) ===
Religious and communal guarantees, such as for freedom of religion and education, were made in general terms without reference to any specific religion.The Vatican and the Italian and French governments concentrated their efforts on the issue of the Holy Places and rights of the Christian communities; they pressed their legal claims on the basis of the former Protectorate of the Holy See and the French Protectorate of Jerusalem. The Catholic powers saw an opportunity to reverse the gains made by the Greek and Russian Orthodox communities in the region over the previous 150 years, as documented in the Status Quo (Jerusalem and Bethlehem). The Zionists showed limited interest in this area.Britain was to assume responsibility for the Holy Places under Article 13 of the mandate. The idea of an International Commission to resolve claims on the Holy Places had been formalised in Article 95 of the Treaty of Sèvres, and taken up again in article 14 of the Palestinian Mandate. Negotiations concerning the formation and the role of the commission were partly responsible for the delay in ratifying the mandate. Article 14 of the Mandate required Britain to establish a commission to study, define, and determine the rights and claims relating to the different religious communities in Palestine. This provision, which called for the creation of a commission to review the religious Status Quo between the religious communities, was never implemented.Article 15 required the mandatory administration to see to it that complete freedom of conscience and the free exercise of all forms of worship were permitted. Article 15 stated that "No discrimination of any kind shall be made between the inhabitants of Palestine on the ground of race, religion or language. No person shall be excluded from Palestine on the sole ground of his religious belief." The High Commissioner established the authority of the Orthodox Rabbinate over the members of the Jewish community and retained a modified version of the old Ottoman Millet system. Formal recognition was extended to eleven religious communities, which did not include the non-Orthodox Jewish or Protestant Christian denominations.


=== Transjordan (Article 25 and Transjordan memorandum) ===
The public clarification and implementation of Article 25, more than a year after it had been added to the mandate, confuses some "into imagining that Transjordanian territory was covered by the conditions of the Mandate as to the Jewish National Home before August 1921". This was, in the words of Professor of Modern Jewish History Bernard Wasserstein, to result in "the myth of Palestine's 'first partition' [which became] part of the concept of 'Greater Israel' and of the ideology of Jabotinsky's Revisionist movement". Palestinian-American intellectual Ibrahim Abu-Lughod, then chair of the Northwestern University political science department, suggested that the "Jordan as a Palestinian State" references made by Israeli spokespeople may reflect "the same [mis]understanding".
On 25 April 1923, five months prior to the mandate coming into force, the independent administration was recognised in a statement made in Amman: Subject to the approval of the League of Nations, His Britannic Majesty will recognise the existence of an independent Government in Trans-jordan under the rule of His Highness the Amir Abdullah, provided that such Government is constitutional and places His Britannic Majesty in a position to fulfil his international obligations in respect of the territory by means of an Agreement to be concluded with His Highness


=== Legality ===

The legality of the mandate has been disputed in detail by scholars, in particular with respect to its consistency with Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations.The preamble of the Mandate document states that the Mandate is granted to Britain "for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of Article 22 of the Covenant of the League of Nations". That article, which concerns entrusting "tutelage" of colonies formerly under German and Turkish sovereignty to "advanced nations" with specific regard to "[c]ommunities formerly belonging to the Turkish Empire" that they "have reached a stage of development where their existence as independent nations can be provisionally recognised subject to the rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory until such time as they are able to stand alone." Throughout the period of the Mandate, Palestinian Arab leaders cited this as proving their assertion that the British were obliged under the terms of the Mandate to facilitate the eventual creation of an independent Arab state in Palestine.


=== Borders ===

Prior to the war, the territory which became Mandatory Palestine formerly constituted the Ottoman Empire divisions of the Mutasarrifate of Jerusalem and the southern part of the Beirut Vilayet, whilst what became Transjordan was made up of the southern part of the Vilayet of Syria and the northern part of the Hejaz Vilayet. During the war the British military divided the Hejaz theatre of war and the EEF theatre of war along a line from a point south of Akaba to a point south of Ma'an. The EEF theatre was divided between its main theatre in Palestine, led directly by the EEF, and the Syrian theatre, including Transjordan, led by the Arab Revolt army of Faisal. The post-war military administrations, OETA South and OETA East, the latter with an Arab governor, split the territory in the same way; Professor Yitzhak Gil-Har notes that "the military administration always treated Trans-Jordan as a separate administration outside its jurisdiction". Professor Uri Ra'anan, commenting in 1955, stated that the OETA system of borders "politically, if not legally, was bound to influence the post-war settlement".At a private meeting during the Peace Conference on 13 September 1919, a memorandum was handed by Lloyd George to Georges Clemenceau which stated that British Palestine would be "defined in accordance with its ancient boundaries of Dan to Beersheba".The Biblical concept of Eretz Israel, and its re-establishment as a state in the modern era, was a basic tenet of the original Zionist program. Chaim Weizmann, as leader of the Zionist delegation, at the 1919 Paris Peace Conference presented a Zionist Statement on 3 February. He presented a plan for development together with a map of the proposed homeland. The statement noted the Jewish historical connection with "Palestine". It also declared the Zionists' proposed borders and resources "essential for the necessary economic foundation of the country" including "the control of its rivers and their headwaters". These borders included present day Israel and the occupied territories, western Jordan, southwestern Syria and southern Lebanon "in the vicinity south of Sidon".Neither Palestinian nor any other Arabs were involved in discussions which led to determining the boundaries of Mandatory Palestine.


==== Palestine-Egypt border ====

The first border on which agreement was reached was with British-ruled Egypt. On 9 May 1919, a memorandum of the British political delegation to the Paris peace conference stated that the British intended to adopt the border line established between Egypt and the Ottoman Empire in 1906. The decision represented a compromise between the proposals by the Zionists and the British authorities in Egypt, and was already well defined on maps.The Negev region was added to Palestine on 10 July 1922, having been conceded by British representative John Philby "in Trans-Jordan's name". Abdullah made a request for the Negev to be added to Transjordan in late 1922, and again in 1925, but this was rejected.


==== Northern borders ====
The determination of the mandate's northern border was a far longer and more complex process than for the other borders. The two primary differences were that this border separated French– and British–controlled areas and that it ran through heavily populated areas which had not previously been separated – the other borders separated British Palestine from British Egypt and British Transjordan, and ran primarily through sparsely inhabited areas.The Northern boundary between the British and French mandates was defined in broad terms by the Franco-British Boundary Agreement of December 1920; this became known as the Paulet–Newcombe Agreement after French Lieutenant Colonel N. Paulet and British Lieutenant Colonel S. F. Newcombe, who were appointed to lead the 1923 Boundary Commission to finalise the agreement. The agreement placed the bulk of the Golan Heights in the French sphere. The treaty also established a joint commission to settle the precise border and mark it on the ground. The commission submitted its final report on 3 February 1922, and it was approved with some caveats by the British and French governments on 7 March 1923, several months before Britain and France assumed their Mandatory responsibilities on 29 September 1923. Under the treaty, Syrian and Lebanese residents would have the same fishing and navigation rights on Lake Hula, Lake Tiberias, and the Jordan River as citizens of the Palestine Mandate, but the government of Palestine would be responsible for policing of the lakes. The Zionist movement pressured the French and British to include as much water sources as possible to Palestine during the demarcating negotiations. These constant demands influenced the negotiators and finally led to the inclusion of the whole Sea of Galilee, both sides of the Jordan river, Lake Hula, Dan spring, and part of the Yarmouk. As High Commissioner of Palestine, Herbert Samuel had demanded full control of the Sea of Galilee. The new border followed a 10-meter wide strip along the northeastern shore.Following the settlement of the Northern border issue, the British and French governments signed on 2 February 1926 an Agreement of good neighbourly relations between the mandated territories of Palestine, Syria and Lebanon.


==== Palestine-Transjordan border ====

The future Transjordan had been part of the Syria Vilayet, primarily the sanjaks of Hauran and Ma'an (Kerak), under the Ottomans. Since the end of the war it had been part of the captured territory placed under the Arab administration of OETA East, which was subsequently declared as part of Faisal's Arab Kingdom of Syria. The British were content with that arrangement because Faisal was a British ally, the region fell within the indirect sphere of British influence according to the Sykes-Picot agreement, and they did not have enough troops to garrison the territory.

Throughout the drafting of the mandate, the Zionist Organization advocated for some territory east of the river to be included in "Palestine". At the Peace Conference, on 3 February 1919 the Zionist Organization proposed an eastern boundary of "a line close to and West of the Hedjaz Railway terminating in the Gulf of Akaba"; the railway ran parallel with and about 35–40 miles (about 60 km) east of the Jordan river. A few months later, in May, British officials presented a proposal to the Peace Conference including maps showing the eastern boundary of Palestine located just 10 km east of the Jordan. No agreement was reached at the Peace Conference; as discussed above, the topic was not discussed at the April 1920 San Remo conference, at which the boundaries of the "Palestine" and "Syria" mandates were left unspecified, to "be determined by the Principal Allied Powers" at a later stage.The Jordan river was finally chosen as the border between the two territories; this was documented in Article 25 of the mandate, approved by Curzon on 31 March 1921 as discussed above, which set the boundary as simply "the Jordan [river]". No further definition was discussed until mid-1922, catalyzed by negotiations over the Rutenberg hydroelectric power-plant and the Constitution of Mandatory Palestine (which did not apply to Transjordan, hence the need for a clear definition); the latter's publication on 1 September was the first official statement of the detailed boundary line, which was repeated in 16 September 1922 Transjordan memorandum: "from a point two miles west of the town of Akaba on the Gulf of that name up the centre of the Wady Araba, Dead Sea and River Jordan to its junction with the River Yarmuk; thence up the centre of that river to the Syrian Frontier".


==== Transjordan-Arabia border ====
The southern border between Transjordan and Arabia was considered strategic for Transjordan in order to avoid being landlocked, with intended access to the sea via the Port of Aqaba. The southern region of Ma'an-Aqaba, a large area with a small population of just 10,000, was administered by OETA East (later the Arab Kingdom of Syria, and then Mandatory Transjordan) and claimed by the Kingdom of Hejaz. In OETA East, Faisal had appointed a kaymakam (or sub-governor) at Ma'an, whereas the kaymakam at Aqaba, who "disregarded both Husein in Mecca and Feisal in Damascus with impunity" had been instructed by Hussein to extend his authority to Ma'an. This technical dispute did not rise to any form of open struggle, and the Kingdom of Hejaz was to take de facto control after Faisal's administration was defeated by the French. Following the 1924–25 Saudi conquest of Hejaz, Hussein's army fled to the Ma'an region, which was then formally announced as annexed by Abdullah's Transjordan. Ibn Saud privately agreed to respect this position in an exchange of letters at the time of the 1927 Treaty of Jeddah.


==== Transjordan-Iraq border ====
The location of the Eastern border between Transjordan and Iraq was considered strategic with respect to the proposed construction of what became the Kirkuk–Haifa oil pipeline. It was first set out on 2 December 1922, in a treaty to which Transjordan was not party to – the Uqair Protocol between Iraq and Nejd. It described the western end of the Iraq-Nejd boundary as "the Jebel Anazan situated in the neighbourhood of the intersection of latitude 32 degrees north longitude 39 degrees east where the Iraq-Najd boundary terminated", thereby implicitly confirming this as the point at which the Iraq-Nejd boundary became the Transjordan-Nejd boundary. This followed a proposal from T.E.Lawrence in January 1922 that Transjordan be extended to include Wadi Sirhan as far south as al-Jauf, in order to protect Britain's route to India and contain Ibn Saud.


== Impact and Termination ==


=== Mandatory Palestine ===

The British controlled Palestine for almost three decades, overseeing a succession of protests, riots and revolts between the Jewish and Palestinian Arab communities.On 29 November 1947, the United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine was passed, envisaging the creation of separate Jewish and Arab states operating under economic union with Jerusalem being transferred to UN trusteeship. Two weeks later, Colonial Secretary Arthur Creech Jones announced that the British Mandate would terminate on 15 May 1948. On the last day of the Mandate, the creation of the State of Israel was proclaimed, and the 1948 Arab–Israeli War began.


=== Emirate of Transjordan ===

In April 1923, five months before the mandate came into force, Britain announced their intention to recognise an "independent Government" in Transjordan.Transjordan became largely autonomous under British tutelage according to an agreement of 20 February 1928, and fully independent under a treaty with Britain of 22 March 1946.


== Key dates from Balfour Declaration to Mandate becoming effective ==


== See also ==
Permanent Mandates Commission
Minority Treaties
United Nations Partition Plan for Palestine


== Notes ==


=== Primary supporting quotes ===


=== Explanatory notes and scholarly perspectives ===


== Citations ==


== Bibliography ==


=== Specialised works ===
Abu-Lughod, Ibrahim (1988). "Territorially-based Nationalism and the Politics of Negation".  In Edward Said and Christopher Hitchens (ed.). Blaming the Victims: Spurious Scholarship and the Palestinian Question. Verso. ISBN 978-1-85984-340-6.
Amadouny, Vartan (2012). "The Evolution of the Transjordan-Iraq Boundary, 1915–40".  In Clive H. Schofield and Richard N. Schofield (ed.). The Middle East and North Africa: World Boundaries. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-88028-7.
Alsberg, Paul Avraham (1973). "קביעת הגבול המזרחי של ארץ ישראל (Determining the Eastern Boundary of the Land of Israel)".  In Daniel Carpi (ed.). הציונות: מאסף לתולדות התנועה הציונית והישוב היהודי בארץ־ישראל. וניברסיטת תל-אביב, הוצאת הכבוץ המיוחד. available in pdf hereAlsberg, Avraham P. (1980). "Delimitation of the eastern border of Palestine". Zionism. Studies in Zionism. 2. Institute for Zionist Research Founded in Memory of Chaim Weizmann. pp. 87–98. doi:10.1080/13531048108575800.
Aruri, Naseer Hasan (1972). Jordan: A Study in Political Development 1923–1965. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 978-90-247-1217-5. Retrieved 2 May 2009.
Baker, Randall (1979). King Husain and the Kingdom of Hejaz. The Oleander Press. p. 220. ISBN 978-0-900891-48-9.
Beshara, Adel (27 April 2012). The Origins of Syrian Nationhood: Histories, Pioneers and Identity. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-136-72450-3.
Brecher, Frank W. (1987). "Woodrow Wilson and the Origins of the Arab-Israeli Conflict". American Jewish Archives. 39 (1): 23–47.
Cattan, Henry (1969). Palestine, the Arabs and Israel: the search for justice. Longmans. ISBN 9780582780002.
Biger, Gideon (2004). The Boundaries of Modern Palestine, 1840–1947. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-76652-8.
Boustany, Wadi Faris (1936). The Palestine Mandate, Invalid and Impracticable: A Contribution of Arguments and Documents Towards the Solution of the Palestine Problem. P. 10 and App. Added and Arabic Version Pres. to the Supreme Arab Committee in Aug., 1936. American Press. OCLC 337112.
Caplan, Neil (2011). The Israel-Palestine Conflict: Contested Histories. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-5786-8.
Cassels, Alan (1970). Mussolini's Early Diplomacy. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-7234-3.
Barzilay-Yegar, Dvorah (2017). A National Home for the Jewish People: The Concept in British Political Thinking and Policy Making 1917–1923. Vallentine Mitchell. ISBN 978-1-910383-32-2.
Cohen, Michael J. (2010). "Was the Balfour Declaration at risk in 1923? Zionism and British imperialism". Journal of Israeli History. 29 (1).
Defries, Harry (2014). Conservative Party Attitudes to Jews 1900–1950. Routledge. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-135-28462-6.
Davidson, Lawrence (2002). "The Past as Prelude: Zionism and the Betrayal of American Democratic Principles, 1917–48". Journal of Palestine Studies. 31 (3): 21–35. doi:10.1525/jps.2002.31.3.21. ISSN 0377-919X.
Friedman, Isaiah (1973). The Question of Palestine: British-Jewish-Arab Relations, 1914–1918. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4128-3868-9.
Friedman, Isaiah (2011). British Pan-Arab Policy, 1915-1922. Transaction Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4128-1514-7.
Friedman, Isaiah (1987). The Rise of Israel: Britain enters into a compact with Zionism, 1917. Garland. ISBN 978-0-8240-4906-5.
Frischwasser-Ra'anan, Heinz Felix (1955). The Frontiers of a Nation: A Re-examination of the Forces which Created the Palestine Mandate and Determined Its Territorial Shape. Batchworth Press. ISBN 978-0-598-93542-7.
Huneidi, Sahar (2001). A Broken Trust: Sir Herbert Samuel, Zionism and the Palestinians. I.B.Tauris. p. 84. ISBN 978-1-86064-172-5.
Huneidi, Sahar (1998). "Was Balfour Policy Reversible? The Colonial Office and Palestine, 1921–23" (PDF). Journal of Palestine Studies. 27 (2): 23–41. doi:10.1525/jps.1998.27.2.00p0033m. JSTOR 2538282.
Garfinkle, Adam (1998). "History and Peace: Revisiting two Zionist myths". Israel Affairs. 5 (1).
Gelvin, James (2014) [2002]. The Israel-Palestine Conflict: One Hundred Years of War (3 ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85289-0.
Ghandour, Zeina B. (10 September 2009). A Discourse on Domination in Mandate Palestine: Imperialism, Property and Insurgency. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-00963-3.
Gil-Har, Yitzhak (2000). "Boundaries Delimitation: Palestine and Transjordan". Middle Eastern Studies. 36 (1): 68–81. doi:10.1080/00263200008701297.
Guckian, Noel Joseph (1985). British Relations with Trans-Jordan, 1920–1930 (PhD). Department of International Politics, Aberystwyth University.
Halabi, Awad (2012). "Liminal Loyalties: Ottomanism and Palestinian Responses to the Turkish War of Independence, 1919–22". Journal of Palestine Studies. 41 (3): 19–37. doi:10.1525/jps.2012.XLI.3.19.
Hughes, Matthew (2013). Allenby and British Strategy in the Middle East, 1917–1919. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-32395-9.
Ingrams, Doreen (2009). Palestine papers: 1917–1922: seeds of conflict. Eland. ISBN 978-1-906011-38-3.
Jeffries, Joseph Mary Nagle (1939). Palestine: The Reality. Longmans, Green and Company. p. 105.
Jones, Martin (6 October 2016). Failure in Palestine: British and United States Policy After the Second World War. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-4742-9127-9.
Karsh, Efraim; Karsh, Inari (2001). Empires of the Sand: The Struggle for Mastery in the Middle East, 1789–1923. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00541-9.
Kattan, Victor (June 2009). From coexistence to conquest: international law and the origins of the Arab-Israeli conflict, 1891–1949. Pluto Press. ISBN 978-0-7453-2579-8.
Kedouri, Elie (2014). In the Anglo-Arab Labyrinth: The McMahon-Husayn Correspondence and Its Interpretations 1914–1939. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-30842-1.
Klieman, Aaron S. (1970). Foundations of British policy in the Arab world: the Cairo Conference of 1921. Johns Hopkins Press.
Klieman, Aaron S. (1987). The Rise of Israel: Zionist Political Activity in the 1920s and 1930s. Garland Pub. ISBN 978-0-8240-4917-1.
Knee, Stuart E (4 February 2014). "The King-Crane Commission of 1919: The Articulation of Political Anti-Zionism".  In Jeffrey Gurock (ed.). American Zionism: Missions and Politics: American Jewish History. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-136-67549-2.
Leatherdale, Clive (1983). Britain and Saudi Arabia, 1925–1939: The Imperial Oasis. Psychology Press. pp. 41–42. ISBN 978-0-7146-3220-9.
Leslie, Shane (1923). Mark Sykes: His Life and Letters. FRANKLIN CLASSICS TRADE Press. ISBN 978-0-353-27676-5.
Lebow, Richard Ned (1968). "Woodrow Wilson and the Balfour Declaration". The Journal of Modern History. 40 (4): 501–523. doi:10.1086/240237. JSTOR 1878450.
Lalonde, Suzanne N. (6 December 2002). Determining Boundaries in a Conflicted World: The Role of Uti Possidetis. McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP. ISBN 978-0-7735-7049-8.
Lieshout, Robert H. (2016). Britain and the Arab Middle East: World War I and its Aftermath. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-1-78453-583-4.
Louis, William Roger (1969). "The United Kingdom and the Beginning of the Mandates System, 1919–1922". International Organization. University of Wisconsin Press. 23 (1): 73–96. doi:10.1017/S0020818300025534. JSTOR 2705765.
Louis, William Roger (1985). The British Empire in the Middle East, 1945–1951. ISBN 9780198229605.
Marlowe, John (1959). The Seat of Pilate: An Account of the Palestine Mandate. Cresset Press.
Mathew, William M. (2011). "War-Time Contingency and the Balfour Declaration of 1917: An Improbable Regression" (PDF). Journal of Palestine Studies. 40 (2): 26–42. doi:10.1525/jps.2011.xl.2.26. JSTOR 10.1525/jps.2011.xl.2.26.
Matz-Lück, Nele (September 2005). "Civilization and the Mandate System under the League of Nations as Origin of Trusteeship".  In Armin Von Bogdandy; Rüdiger Wolfrum; Christiane E. Philipp (eds.). Max Planck Yearbook of United Nations Law (PDF). Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 90-04-14533-8.
Mazzawi, Musa E. (1 January 1997). Palestine and the Law: Guidelines for the Resolution of the Arab-Israel Conflict. Ithaca Press. ISBN 978-0-86372-222-6.
Mcveigh, Shaun (12 March 2007). "Conjuring Palestine". Jurisprudence of Jurisdiction. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-42828-0.
McTague, John (1983). British Policy in Palestine, 1917-22. University Press of America. p. 286. ISBN 0-8191-2934-8.
McTague, John J. (1980). "Zionist-British Negotiations over the Draft Mandate for Palestine, 1920". Jewish Social Studies. Indiana University Press. 42 (3/4): 281–292. JSTOR 4467095.
Pappé, Ilan (2004). A History of Modern Palestine: One Land, Two Peoples. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-55632-5.
Pappé, Ilan (15 August 1994). "Introduction". The Making of the Arab–Israeli Conflict, 1947–1951. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-1-85043-819-9. Retrieved 2 May 2009.
Paris, Timothy J. (2003). Britain, the Hashemites and Arab Rule: The Sherifian Solution. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-77191-1.
Quigley, John B. (1990). Palestine and Israel: A Challenge to Justice. Duke University Press.
Quigley, John (6 September 2010). The Statehood of Palestine: International Law in the Middle East Conflict. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-49124-2.
Quigley, John (2011). "Britain's Secret Re-Assessment of the Balfour Declaration.The Perfidy of Albion". Journal of the History of International Law. 13 (2).
Reid, Walter (1 September 2011). Empire of Sand: How Britain Made the Middle East. Birlinn. ISBN 978-0-85790-080-7.
Renton, James (2016). "Flawed Foundations: The Balfour Declaration and the Palestine Mandate".  In Miller, Rory (ed.). Britain, Palestine and Empire: The Mandate Years. Routledge. pp. 15–37. ISBN 978-1-317-17233-8.
Salibi, Kamal S. (15 December 1998). The Modern History of Jordan. I.B.Tauris. p. 93. ISBN 978-1-86064-331-6.
Schneer, Jonathan (2010). The Balfour Declaration: The Origins of the Arab-Israeli Conflict. Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-6532-5.
Silverburg, Sanford R. (29 January 2009). Palestine and International Law: Essays on Politics and Economics. McFarland. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-7864-4248-5.
Sicker, Martin (1999). Reshaping Palestine: From Muhammad Ali to the British Mandate, 1831-1922. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-275-96639-3.
Stoyanovsky, Jacob (1928). The mandate for Palestine: a contribution to the theory and practice of international mandates. Longmans, Green.
Sykes, Christopher (1973). Crossroads to Israel. Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-20165-9.
Wilson, Mary Christina (1990). King Abdullah, Britain and the Making of Jordan. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-39987-6.
Wright, Quincy (1930). Mandates Under the League of Nations. University of Chicago Press. OCLC 562719723.
Wright, Esmond (1951). "Abdallah's Jordan: 1947–1951". Middle East Journal. 5: 439–460.
Zander, Walter (1973). "On the Settlement of Disputes About the Christian Holy Places". Israel Law Review. 8 (3): 331–366. doi:10.1017/S0021223700004258.
Zieger, Robert H. (2001). America's Great War: World War I and the American Experience. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8476-9645-1.


=== General histories ===
Hurewitz, J. C. (1 June 1979). The Middle East and North Africa in World Politics: A Documentary Record – British-French Supremacy, 1914–1945. Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-02203-2.
Wasserstein, Bernard (2008). Israel and Palestine: Why They Fight and Can They Stop?. Profile Books. ISBN 978-1-84668-092-2.


=== Works by involved parties ===
Bentwich, Norman (1932). England in Palestine. K. Paul, Trench, Trubner & Company Limited.
Bentwich, Norman (1929). "The Mandate for Transjordan". British Yearbook of International Law. Humphrey Sumner Milford. 10: 212–213.
ESCO Foundation (1947), Palestine – A Study Of Jewish Arab And British Policies, I, Yale University Press, OCLC 459549878
Macmunn, G. F.; Falls, C. (1930). Military Operations: Egypt and Palestine, From June 1917 to the End of the War Part II. History of the Great War based on Official Documents by Direction of the Committee of Imperial Defence. II. accompanying Map Case (1st ed.). London: HMSO. OCLC 656066774.
Palestine Royal Commission (1937), Cmd. 5479, Palestine Royal Commission Report, also known as the "Peel Report" (PDF), HMSO, For further information see the Commission's Wikipedia article at Peel Commission
Lausanne Conference (1923), Cmd. 1814, Lausanne Conference on Near Eastern Affairs 1922–1923: Records of Proceedings and Draft Terms of Peace, HMSO
UN Division for Palestinian Rights (1978), "Part I", The Origins and Evolution of the Palestine Problem, United Nations, online and in pdf form
Weizmann, Chaim (1949). Trial and Error, The Autobiography of Chaim Weizmann. Jewish Publication Society of America. OCLC 830295337.
Council of Ten (1919), "The council of ten: minutes of meetings January 12 to February 14, 1919", Papers relating to the foreign relations of the United States, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, III, United States Government Printing Office
Council of Four (1919), "The Council of Four: minutes of meetings March 20 to May 24, 1919", Papers relating to the foreign relations of the United States, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, V, United States Government Printing Office
Chamberlain, Austen (1924), Convention between the United States of America and Great Britain; Treaty Series No. 728, United States Government Printing Office
The Council of Heads of Delegations (1919), "The Council of Heads of Delegations: minutes of meetings August 29 to November 5, 1919", Papers relating to the foreign relations of the United States, The Paris Peace Conference, 1919, United States Government Printing Office
Woodward, Ernest Llewellyn (1952). Documents on British Foreign Policy, 1919–1939, First series, Volume IV. H.M. Stationery Office.
Woodward, Ernest Llewellyn (1963). Documents on British Foreign Policy, 1919–1939, First series, Volume XIII. H.M. Stationery Office.
Zionist Organisation (1921). "Political Report". Extracts from the reports of the executive of the Zionist Organisation to the twelfth Zionist Congress, Carlsbad, September, 1921. Zionist Organisation.
Zionist Organization (1922). Report of the Twelfth Zionist Congress: Held at Carlsbad, September 1st to 14th 1921. Central Office of the Zionist Organization.; original German transcript at Stenographisches Protokoll der Verhandlungen des 12. Zionisten-Kongresses in Karlsbad vom 1. bis 14. September 1921 [Proceedings of the 12th Zionist Congress September 1 to 14, 1921 in Karlsbad (Karlovy Vary)]. sammlungen.ub.uni-frankfurt.de (in German). Berlin: Jüdischer Verlag. 1922. p. 279. ZDB 2176334-3.