Dato' Sri Mohd Zin bin Mohamed (Jawi: محمد زين بن محمد; born 28 March 1954) was the Member of the Parliament of Malaysia for the Sepang constituency in Selangor from 2004 to 2013. A member of the United Malays National Organisation (UMNO) in Malaysia's ruling Barisan Nasional coalition, he was Malaysia's Minister for Works from 2008 to 2009.


== Early life ==
Mohd Zin was born in Muar, Johore. He were raised by decent Malay couple, an unsung hero, Mr.Tasor bin Taibi and Mdm.Rahmah binti Samsudin who live in Sungai Midah Luar,Cheras Kuala Lumpur.He were sent to school along together with his foster siblings.  He lived a very normal kampung boy life. Not luxury but good enough to survive and get a good education.
Mohd Zin obtained his Diploma of Civil Engineering from UiTM in 1977. He then went on to work with PKNS before continuing his study in Bradley University, Peoria, Illinois, USA. In 1980 he furthered his study in the same university to obtain his master's degree.


== Political career ==
Mohd Zin was the head of Section 8 Shah Alam UMNO Division (1986–1993), the youth chief of UMNO Shah Alam (1989–1994), the Treasurer for Selangor UMNO Youth and a member of the national UMNO Youth executive council.
In 2001 he was elected as the Deputy Chief of UMNO Shah Alam and later became the Chief Sponsor of UMNO Kota Raja and later UMNO Sepang.
He entered the federal parliament in the 2004 election, winning the seat of Sepang. During his first term in parliament he was appointed as Deputy Minister for Works. After his re-election in 2008, he became the Minister for Works, replacing the long-serving Samy Vellu. However, in April 2009, Mohd Zin was dropped from the Cabinet by incoming Prime Minister Najib Tun Razak, and was replaced in his ministry by Shaziman Abu Mansor. In November 2009, he was appointed as the Chairman of Keretapi Tanah Melayu, peninsular Malaysia's main rail operator.In the 2013 election, the Barisan Nasional coalition suffered heavy losses in the state of Selangor, and Mohd Zin lost his parliamentary seat to Mohamed Hanipa Maidin of the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party (PAS).


== Election results ==


== References ==