Neo-nationalism or new nationalism is a type of nationalism that rose in the mid-2010s in Europe and North America and to some degree in other regions. It is associated with several positions, such as right-wing populism, anti-globalization, nativism, protectionism, opposition to immigration, opposition to Islam and Muslims, Sinophobia, and Euroscepticism where applicable. According to one scholar, "nationalist resistance to global liberalism turned out to be the most influential force in Western politics" in 2016. Particularly notable expressions of new nationalism include the vote for Brexit in the 2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum and the 2016 election of Donald Trump as the 45th President of the United States.


== Overview and characteristics ==
Writing for Politico, Michael Hirsh described new nationalism as "a bitter populist rejection of the status quo that global elites have imposed on the international system since the Cold War ended, and which lower-income voters have decided—understandably—is unfair." Michael Brendan Dougherty wrote in The Week that new nationalism is a "broad nativist revolt" against post-Cold War politics long "characterized by an orthodoxy of free trade, nurturing the service economy, neoliberal trading arrangements, and liberalized immigration policies."The Economist wrote in November 2016 that "new nationalists are riding high on promises to close borders and restore societies to a past homogeneity." Clarence Page wrote in the Las Vegas Sun that "a new neo-tribal nationalism has boiled up in European politics and to a lesser degree in the United States since the global economic meltdown of 2008," and Ryan Cooper in The Week and researchers with the Centre for Economic Policy Research have linked 21st-century right-wing populism to the Great Recession. According to Harvard political theorist Yascha Mounk, "economic stagnation among lower- and middle-class whites [has been] a main driver for nationalism's rise around the globe." According to religion scholar Mark L. Movesian, new nationalism "sets the nation-state against supranational, liberal regimes like the EU or NAFTA, and local customs and traditions, including religious traditions, against alien, outside trends."David Brog and Yoram Hazony wrote in National Review that some conservatives view the new nationalism associated with Brexit and Donald Trump as a betrayal of conservative ideology while they see it as a "return". According to conservative commentator Jonah Goldberg, the nationalism associated with Trump is "really little more than a brand name for generic white identity politics."Writing for The Week, Damon Linker called the idea of neo-nationalism being racist "nonsense" and went on to say that "the tendency of progressives to describe it as nothing but 'racism, Islamophobia, and xenophobia'—is the desire to delegitimize any particularistic attachment or form of solidarity, be it national, linguistic, religious, territorial, or ethnic."Regarding new nationalism, The Economist said that "Mr Trump needs to realise that his policies will unfold in the context of other countries’ jealous nationalism," and called nationalism itself a "slippery concept" that is "easy to manipulate". They also repeatedly contrasted ethnic nationalism and civic nationalism and implied new nationalism could become "angry" and difficult to control, citing Chinese nationalism as an example.


== Associated politicians, parties and events ==


=== Brazil ===
The President of Brazil Jair Bolsonaro of the country's Social Liberal Party has been described as a leading new nationalist. Bolsonaro's ideology and policies have been heavily influenced by his adviser, nationalist thinker Olavo de Carvalho.


=== China ===
China's paramount leader Xi Jinping assumed the position of General Secretary of the Communist Party of China in 2012. His concept of "Chinese Dream" has been described as an expression of new nationalism. His form of nationalism stresses pride in the historic Chinese civilisation, embracing the teachings of Confucius and other ancient Chinese sages, and thus rejecting the anti-Confucius campaign of Chairman Mao Zedong.


==== Hong Kong ====
The Hong Kong nationalism evolved from the localist movement in Hong Kong stresses the distinct Hong Kong identity as opposed to Chinese national identity promoted by the Beijing government and its growing encroachment on the city's management of its own political, economic and social affairs. The localist rhetorics, often mix with the nation's right to self-determination as well as anti-immigration stances against mainland immigrants and tourists, preserving local identity and culture similar to the Western new nationalism.


=== Egypt ===
Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi (assumed office in 2014), has been described as a new nationalist.


=== Hungary ===
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán (assumed office in 2010), the leader of the ruling Fidesz party, has been described as a new nationalist.


=== India ===
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi (assumed office in 2014) and his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) have been referred to as new nationalist. Modi is a member of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), a right-wing paramilitary organisation aligned with the BJP, which has also been said to advocate a new nationalist ideology.Yogi Adityanath, Chief Minister of the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh (assumed office in 2017), has also been identified as a new nationalist. He has been touted as a future Prime Minister of the country.


=== Israel ===
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu (assumed office in 2009), the leader of the Likud party, has been described both as promoting new nationalism, and as pursuing a foreign policy of close ties with other new nationalist leaders, including Trump, Orbán, Salvini, Putin, Modi, Bolsonaro, Duterte and Sisi.Domestically, Netanyahu has forged a political alliance with the nationalist Union of the Right-Wing Parties.


=== Italy ===
Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte (assumed office in 2018), head of the populist coalition Government of Change, and in particular former Deputy Prime Minister and Interior Minister and the League's leader Matteo Salvini (2018–2019), were often described as new nationalists. Salvini has been described by some media outlets as the most powerful politician in the country, and a "de facto prime minister".Giorgia Meloni, the leader of Brothers of Italy, a party supporting the government on a case-by-case basis, has also been described as a new nationalist.


=== Japan ===
The 63rd and current Prime Minister Shinzō Abe (assumed office in 2012), a member of the right-wing organisation Nippon Kaigi, has promoted ideas of new nationalism, as does the Liberal Democratic Party of Japan, which he leads.


=== Mexico ===
Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador (assumed office in 2018) has been described as Neo-nationalist and often dubbed as "Mexican Donald Trump" by the media.


=== Philippines ===
Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte (assumed office in 2016) has been described as a new nationalist.


=== Poland ===
The sixth and current President of Poland Andrzej Duda (assumed office in August 2015) is regularly cited as being a leading figure in the new nationalist movement within Poland. Furthermore, the ruling Law and Justice party and its United Right alliance, led by Jarosław Kaczyński, promoted nationalist views to win an outright majority in the national elections of 2015 (a feat never before accomplished). Despite not holding a government office, Kaczyński has been described as the figure who makes the "final call" on all major political issues in Poland.


=== Russia ===
President of Russia Vladimir Putin (second President of Russia from 2000 to 2008 and fourth President of Russia from 2012) has been labelled a new nationalist. Putin has been described by Hirsh as "the harbinger of this new global nationalism". Charles Clover, the Moscow bureau chief of the Financial Times from 2008 to 2013, wrote a book in 2016 titled Black Wind, White Snow: The Rise of Russia's New Nationalism. Russian nationalist thinker Aleksandr Dugin in particular has had influence over the Kremlin, serving as an adviser to key members of the ruling United Russia party, including now-SVR Director Sergey Naryshkin.Russia has been accused of supporting new nationalist movements across Europe and in the United States.


=== Saudi Arabia ===
The Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammad bin Salman (assumed office in 2017), has been described by Kristin Diwan of The Arab Gulf States Institute as being attached to a "strong new nationalism". The "new Saudi nationalism" has been used to bolster support for the Kingdom's economic and foreign policies, and represents a shift away from the Kingdom's earlier dependence on religion for legitimacy. Many of the country's foreign policy actions from 2017 onwards, such as its blockade of Qatar and its diplomatic dispute with Canada have been described as motivated by this nationalism. The policies of Mohammad bin Salman's administration have been heavily influenced by his adviser Saud al-Qahtani, who has been described as a "nationalist ideologue" and whose role has been compared to that formerly of Steve Bannon.


=== Turkey ===
In 2014, Mustafa Akyol wrote of a new "brand of Turkish neonationalism" promoted by Justice and Development Party (AKP), the country's ruling party, the leader of which is President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan (assumed office in 2014). The Turkish "new nationalism" replaces the secular character of traditional forms of Turkish nationalism with an "assertively Muslim" identity.Devlet Bahçeli, the leader of the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), has been described as creating a "new nationalist front" by forming the People's Alliance with Erdoğan's AKP in 2018. The MHP is affiliated with the Grey Wolves paramilitary organisation, which Erdoğan has also expressed support for.


=== United Arab Emirates ===
The United Arab Emirates, under the leadership of Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi Mohammed bin Zayed (assumed office in 2004), has been described as propagating a "new Arab nationalism", which replaces the older, leftist form of the Arab nationalist ideology with a more conservative form, through its strong support for the rise of the respective new leaders of Egypt and Saudi Arabia, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and Prince Mohammad bin Salman, as a means of countering Iranian and Turkish influence in the Arab states.


=== United Kingdom ===
The 23 June 2016 referendum in the United Kingdom to leave the European Union ("Brexit") has been described as a milestone of new nationalism. Owen Matthews noted similarities in motives for support of the Brexit movement and Trump. He wrote in Newsweek that supporters of both are motivated by "a yearning to control immigration, reverse globalization and restore national greatness by disengaging from the wide, threatening world".Matt O'Brien wrote of the Brexit as "the most shocking success for the new nationalism sweeping the Western world". Leaders of the Brexit campaign, such as Nigel Farage, the former leader of the eurosceptic UK Independence Party (now of the Brexit Party); London Mayor (now Prime Minister and Conservative Party leader) Boris Johnson; Vote Leave Co-Convenor Michael Gove; former Brexit Secretary David Davis; and European Research Group chairman Jacob Rees-Mogg, have been called "new nationalists".


=== United States ===

Donald Trump's rise to the Republican candidacy was widely described as a sign of growing new nationalism in the United States. A Chicago Sun-Times editorial on the day of the inauguration of Donald Trump called him "our new nationalist president". The appointment of Steve Bannon, the executive of Breitbart News (later cofounding The Movement), as White House Chief Strategist, was described by one analyst as arousal of a "new world order, driven by patriotism and a fierce urge to look after your own, a neo-nationalism that endlessly smears Muslims and strives to turn back the clock on free trade and globalization, a world where military might counts for far more than diplomacy and compromise".In the wake of Trump's election, U.S. Senator Marco Rubio has called for the Republican Party to embrace a "new nationalism" to oppose "economic elitism that has replaced a commitment to the dignity of work with a blind faith in financial markets and that views America simply as an economy instead of a nation."


=== People ===
The following politicians have all been described in some way as being new nationalists:


===== Africa =====
Hamid Chabat, former Mayor of Fez (2003–2015) and leader of the Moroccan Istiqlal Party
Uhuru Kenyatta, President of Kenya (assumed office in 2013) and leader of the Jubilee Party of Kenya
Mmusi Maimane, Leader of the Opposition (South Africa) and party leader of Democratic Alliance
Herman Mashaba, Mayor of Johannesburg (assumed office in 2016) and member of the Democratic Alliance


===== Americas =====
Jair Bolsonaro, President of Brazil and member of the Social Liberal Party.
Olavo de Carvalho, Brazilian political pundit and journalist.
Mario Abdo Benítez, President of Paraguay (2018–) and candidate from the Colorado Party
Nayib Bukele, former Mayor of San Salvador (2015–2018) and President of El Salvador (2019–)
Horacio Cartes, former President of Paraguay (2013–2018) and candidate from the Colorado Party
Andrés Chadwick, Interior Minister of Chile (2012–2014; 2018–) and member of the Independent Democratic Union
Juan Orlando Hernández, President of Honduras (assumed office in 2014) and candidate from the National Party of Honduras
José Antonio Kast, Member of the Chamber of Deputies of Chile (2002–2018), independent presidential candidate in the 2017 presidential election and leader of Republican Action
François Legault, Premier of Quebec (assumed office in 2018) and leader of the Canadian Coalition Avenir Québec
Kellie Leitch, MP and 2017 candidate for the leadership of the Conservative Party of Canada
Iván Duque Márquez, President of Colombia (assumed office in 2018) and candidate from the Democratic Center
Jimmy Morales, President of Guatemala (assumed office in 2016) and candidate from the National Convergence Front
Fabricio Alvarado Muñoz, the candidate from the Costa Rican National Restoration Party in the 2018 presidential election
Andrés Manuel López Obrador, Preisdent of Mexico and founder of the National Regeneration Movement.
Kevin O'Leary, businessman and 2017 candidate for the leadership of the Conservative Party of Canada
Donald Trump, businessman, television personality and current President of the United States who represents the Republicans.
Marco Rubio, United States senator of Florida and member of the Republican Party.
Steve Bannon, American political figure, former White House Chief Strategist and former executive chairman of Breitbart News.
Tucker Carlson, American political commentator and host for Fox News.


===== Asia-Pacific =====
Tony Abbott, former Prime Minister of Australia (2013–2015) and former leader of the Liberal Party of Australia
Xi Jinping, Paramount leader of China and General Secretary of the Communist Party of China.
Khaltmaagiin Battulga, President of Mongolia (assumed office in 2017) and candidate of the Mongolian Democratic Party
Prayut Chan-o-cha, Prime Minister of Thailand (assumed office in 2014) and prime ministerial candidate of the Phalang Pracharat Party in the 2019 general election
Peter Dutton, Home Affairs Minister of Australia (assumed office in 2017) and member of the Liberal Party of Australia
Park Geun-hye, former President of South Korea (2013–2017) and former leader of the Saenuri Party
Kim Jong-un, Supreme Leader of North Korea (assumed office in 2011) and leader of the Workers' Party of Korea
Hong Jun-pyo, former leader of the Liberty Korea Party and candidate in the 2017 presidential election
Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of India and member of the Bharatiya Janata Party.
Shinzō Abe, Prime Minister of Japan and leader of the Liberal Democratic Party.
Imran Khan, Prime Minister of Pakistan (assumed office in 2018) and leader of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf
Rodrigo Duterte, President of the Philippines and leader of PDP–Laban.
Winston Peters, Deputy Prime Minister of New Zealand (assumed office in 2017) and leader of New Zealand First
Najib Razak, former Prime Minister of Malaysia (2009–2018) and former leader of Barisan Nasional and the United Malays National Organisation
Hun Sen, Prime Minister of Cambodia (assumed office in 1998) and leader of the Cambodian People's Party
Prabowo Subianto, leader of the Great Indonesia Movement Party and candidate in the 2019 presidential election
Abdulla Yameen, former President of the Maldives (2013–2018) and leader of the Progressive Party of Maldives


===== Europe =====
Sebastian Kurz, former Chancellor of Austria and leader of the Austrian People's Party
Heinz-Christian Strache, former Vice Chancellor of Austria (2017-2019) and former leader of the Freedom Party of Austria
Norbert Hofer, former Transport, Innovation and Technology Minister of Austria (2017–2019), leader of the Freedom Party of Austria and candidate in the 2016 presidential election.
Tom Van Grieken, leader of the Belgian Vlaams Belang.
Theo Francken, member of the Belgian Chamber of Representatives and former Secretary of State for Asylum, member of N-VA.
Mischaël Modrikamen, Belgian politician and lawyer, former leader of the People's Party.
Boyko Borisov, Prime Minister of Bulgaria (assumed office in 2009) and leader of GERB
Krasimir Karakachanov, Defence Minister of Bulgaria, leader of IMRO – Bulgarian National Movement and spokesperson for United Patriots.
Veselin Mareshki, Bulgarian businessman and leader of Volya.
Miloš Zeman, President of the Czech Republic (assumed office in 2013) and leader of the Party of Civic Rights.
Andrej Babiš, Prime Minister of the Czech Republic (assumed office in 2017) and leader of ANO 2011
Tomio Okamura, leader of the Czech Freedom and Direct Democracy
Kristian Thulesen Dahl, Member of the Folketing and leader of the Danish People's Party.
Mart Helme, Deputy Prime Minister and Interior Minister of Estonia (assumed office in 2019) and leader of the Conservative People's Party of Estonia
Jussi Halla-aho, Member of the Finnish Parliament and leader of the Finns Party.
Marine Le Pen, leader of the French National Rally and candidate in the 2017 presidential election
Alexander Gauland, Member of the German Bundestag and co-leader of Alternative for Germany.
Jörg Meuthen, Member of the German Bundestag and co-leader of Alternative for Germany.
Alice Weidel, Member of the German Bundestag and parliamentary leader of Alternative For Germany.
Panos Kammenos, former Defence Minister of Greece (2015–2019) and leader of the Independent Greeks
Kyriakos Velopoulos, Greek television personality, politician and leader of the Greek Solution party.
Failos Kranidiotis, Greek lawyer and leader of New Right.
Viktor Orbán, Prime Minister of Hungary and leader of Fidesz.
Sigmundur Davíð Gunnlaugsson, former Prime Minister of Iceland (2013–2016) and leader of the Centre Party
Matteo Salvini, Deputy Prime Minister of Italy and leader of League.
Giorgia Meloni, member of the Italian Chamber of Deputies and leader of Brothers of Italy.
Raivis Zeltīts, Latvian politician and Secretary General of National Alliance.
Rolandas Paksas, former Prime Minister and President of Lithuania, former leader of Order and Justice.
Nebojša Medojević, candidate in the 2008 Montenegrin presidential election and leader of Movement for Changes.
Geert Wilders, leader of the Dutch Party for Freedom
Thierry Baudet, member of the House of Representatives and leader of Forum for Democracy.
Siv Jensen, Norwegian Minister of Finance and current leader of the Progress Party.
Jarosław Kaczyński, former Prime Minister of Poland and leader of Law and Justice.
Andrzej Duda, President of Poland and member of Law and Justice.
Janusz Korwin-Mikke, Polish politician, philosopher, writer, former member of the European Parliament and leader of Confederation.
Victor Ponta, former Prime Minister of Romania (2012–2015) and former leader of the Social Democratic Party
Vladimir Putin, President of Russia, former Prime Minister of Russia and leader of United Russia.
Aleksandar Vučić, President of Serbia (assumed office in 2017) and leader of the Serbian Progressive Party
Robert Fico, former Prime Minister of Slovakia and leader of Direction-Social Democracy 
Andrej Danko, Speaker of the Slovak National Council and leader of the Slovak National Party.
Janez Janša, former Prime Minister of Slovenia and leader of the Slovenian Democratic Party
Santiago Abascal, former member of Basque Parliament, and leader of VOX.
Jimmie Åkesson, Member of the Swedish Riksdag and leader of the Sweden Democrats.
Christoph Blocher, former member of the Swiss Federal Council and former vice president of the Swiss People's Party.
Boris Johnson, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, former Mayor of London and leader of the Conservative Party.
Jacob Rees-Mogg, Leader of the House of Commons and member of the Conservative Party.
Nigel Farage, British Member of the European Parliament, former leader of the UK Independence Party, current leader of the Brexit Party.
Gerard Batten, Deputy leader of the UK Independence Party, former Member of the European Parliament and former leader of the UK Independence Party.


===== Middle East =====
Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, President of Egypt and former Minister of Defence.
Muqtada al-Sadr, leader of the Iraqi Sadrist Movement
Benjamin Netanyahu, Prime Minister of Israel and leader of Likud.
Naftali Bennett, former Israeli Minister of Education, former leader of The Jewish Home and current member of New Right.
Khalifa Haftar, commander of the Libyan National Army (assumed office in 2015)
Tamim bin Hamad, Emir of Qatar (assumed office in 2013)
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, President of Turkey and leader of the Justice and Development Party.
Mohammad bin Salman, Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia and Deputy Prime Minister.
Saud al-Qahtani, Saudi Arabian consultant and former Royal Court Advisor.
Devlet Bahçeli, former Deputy Prime Minister of Turkey and leader of the Nationalist Movement Party.
Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Crown Prince of the United Arab Emirates.


=== Parties ===
The following parties have all been described in some way as being new nationalist parties:


===== Asia-Pacific =====
One Nation, which holds the balance of power in the Australian Senate (since 2016)


===== Europe =====
Alternative for Germany
The Danish People's Party, which provided parliamentary support for the governing coalition in Denmark (2015–2019)
The Finns Party, a former member of the governing coalition in Finland (from 2015 until party split in 2017)
The Dutch Forum for Democracy
The National Alliance, a member of the governing coalition in Latvia (since 2016)
The Slovak National Party, a member of the governing coalition in Slovakia (since 2016)
The Sweden Democrats
The Swiss People's Party, a member of the governing coalition in Switzerland (since 2003)
The United Patriots, a member of the governing coalition in Bulgaria (since 2014)
The Flemish Vlaams Belang
The Portuguese Enough


== See also ==


== References ==