Neoclassical liberalism, also referred to as bleeding-heart libertarianism (BHL) or the Arizona School liberalism, is a libertarian political philosophy and ideology that focuses on the compatibility of support for civil liberties and free markets on the one hand and a concern for social justice and the well-being of the worst-off on the other. Adherents of bleeding-heart libertarianism broadly hold that an agenda focused upon individual liberty will be of most benefit to the economically weak and socially disadvantaged.


== History ==
The first recorded use of the term "bleeding-heart libertarian" seems to have been in a 1996 essay by Roderick T. Long. It was subsequently used in a blog post by Stefan Sharkansky and later picked up and elaborated on by Arnold Kling in an article for TCS Daily. Since then, the term has been used sporadically by a number of libertarian writers including Anthony Gregory and Bryan Caplan.In March 2011, a group of academic philosophers, political theorists and economists created the Bleeding Heart Libertarians blog. Regular contributors to the blog include Fernando Tesón, Gary Chartier, Jason Brennan, Roderick T. Long and Steven Horwitz.


== Criticism ==
Critics of the bleeding-heart libertarian movement include economist David D. Friedman.


== See also ==
Classical liberalism
Classical radicalism
Compassionate conservatism
Distributive justice
Geolibertarianism
Neo-libertarianism
Left-wing market anarchism
Left-libertarianism
Libertarian paternalism
Lockean proviso
Poverty reduction
Radical centrismPeopleGary Chartier
Fred Foldvary
Michael Munger
Michael Otsuka
David Schmidtz
Hillel Steiner
John Tomasi
Matt Zwolinski
Daniel Shapiro


== Notes ==


== References ==
Jeffrey Edward Green (2016), The Shadow of Unfairness: A Plebeian Theory of Liberal Democracy, Oxford University Press.
Jason Brennan, Bas van der Vossen, David Schmidtz, eds. (2017), The Routledge Handbook of Libertarianism, Routledge: "Libertarianism and the Welfare State" by Matt Zwolinski.


== Further reading ==
Jeppe von Platz, "Absolute freedom of contract: Grotian Lessons for Libertarians", Critical Review 25(1), 2013, 107–119.
Rob Reich, "Gift Giving and Philanthropy in Market Democracy", Critical Review 26(3–4), 2014, 408–422.
Nicolás Maloberti, "Rawls and Bleeding Heart Libertarianism: How Well Do They Mix?", The Independent Review 19(4), 2015, 563–582.
Otto Lehto, "The Limited Welfare State as Utopia: The Case for a Libertarian Basic Income", Presentation for the BIEN World Congress (Seoul, Korea, 2016).


== External links ==
Bleeding Heart Libertarians – The official blog
Matt Zwolinski discusses Bleeding Heart Libertarianism with Reason TV
New Libertarians: New Promoters of a Welfare State – A historical look at the development of (and ultimately a criticism of) Bleeding Heart Libertarianism by John P. McCaskey
Instituto Mercado Popular – BHL Brazilian research institute (in Portuguese)