Dr. Ong Kian Ming (Chinese: 王建民; pinyin: Wáng Jiànmín; born 12 September 1975), is a Malaysian politician from the Democratic Action Party (DAP), a component of Pakatan Harapan (PH) coalition. He is the incumbent Member of Parliament for Bangi since 2018 and also when the constituency was still named as Serdang earlier since 2013. Ong was picked as the Deputy Minister of International Trade and Industry by the new PH government in 2018.Ong was formerly an academic and a prominent political analyst in the Malaysian political scene before he turned Election Strategist for the DAP.  His articles were widely published in popular news portals such as Malaysiakini, Malaysian Insider and The Edge. Prior to that he was a lecturer in Faculty of Economics and Policy Science, UCSI University, also a regional consultant for the Blue Ocean Strategy regional center. His experience includes being a policy analyst for Socio Economics Development and Research Institute (SEDAR) and Institute of Strategic Analysis and Policy Research (INSAP). In addition, he was also associate consultant for the Boston Consulting Group Kuala Lumpur.


== Personal life ==
Ong has an elder brother and a younger sister. He grew up in Petaling Jaya. His father was an architect. He married Yeoh Ee Leng in 2004. The couple do not have any children.


== Education ==
Ong, a Fulbright scholar, is a PhD holder in political science from Duke University, USA. He also has a Master's in Economics from Cambridge University and a degree in Economics from London School of Economics. Prior to that he was an ASEAN scholar who completed his "O" and "A" levels in Raffles Institution and Raffles Junior College in Singapore respectively.


== Malaysia Electoral Roll Analysis Project ==
Ong pioneered the Malaysian Electoral Roll Analysis Project (MERAP) and is the director for the project. He has published many of his findings on various news portal as well as discussed it with the Election Commission of Malaysia.


== Election results ==


== References ==