Plurinationality, plurinational, or plurinationalism is defined as the coexistence of two or more sealed or preserved national groups within a polity (an organized community or body of peoples).  Ecuadorian ex-President Rafael Correa defined plurinationalism as the coexistence of several different nationalities within a larger state where different peoples, cultures and worldviews exist and are recognized.  In plurinationalism, the idea of nationality is plural, meaning there are many nationals within an organized community or body of peoples.  Derived from this concept, a plurinational state is the existence of multiple political communities and constitutional asymmetry.  The usage of plurinationality assists in avoiding the division of societies within a state or country.  Furthermore, a plurinational democracy recognizes the multiple demoi (common people or populace) within a polity.


== Plurinational state ==
A plurinational state is formed by political and administrative decentralization, wherein the administrative system is culturally heterogeneous and allows the participation of all the social sectors and groups.  The elements of a plurinational state include being plural, redistributive, antibureaucratic, and a democracy that defends solidarity.  It also has the following additional characteristics: decentralization, autonomy, sustainability, equality, and diversity.


== See also ==
Multiculturalism
Multilateralism
Multinationalism (disambiguation)
National personal autonomy
Pan-nationalism
Pillarisation
Plurinational State of Bolivia


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Pallares, Amalia. The Politics of Disruption, From Pluriculturalism to Plurinationalism, From peasant struggles to Indian resistance: the Ecuadorian Andes in the late twentieth century, University of Oklahoma Press, 2002, 272 pages
MacDonald, Jr., Theodore. Ecuador's Indian Movement: Pawn in a Short Game or Agent in State Reconfiguration?
Masnou i Boixeda, Ramón.  3. Recognition and Respect in Plurinationalism, Notes on Nationalism, Gracewing Publishing, 2002, 146 pages