A political scandal is an action or event regarded as morally or legally wrong and causing general public outrage. Politicians, government officials, party officials, lobbyists can be accused of various illegal, corrupt, or  unethical practices. A political scandal can involve the breaking of the nation's laws or moral codes and may involve sexual scandal.


== Scandal journalism ==
Scandal sells, and broadsides, pamphlets, newspapers, magazines and the electronic media have covered it in depth.  The Muckraker movement in American journalism was a component of the Progressive Era in the U.S. in the early 20th century.  Journalists have built their careers on exposure of corruption and political scandal, often acting on behalf of the opposition party.There are numerous contextual factors that make a scandal noteworthy, such as the importance of the people and the depth of conspiracy, as well as the coverup strategies of policymakers.The political ideology of media owners plays a role—they prefer to target the opposition but will reluctantly cover their own side.  Journalists have to frame the story in terms of the audience's values and expectations to maximize the impact.


== Lists of political scandals by country ==

All pages with titles containing Political scandals
Albania – Political scandals of Albania
Australia – List of Australian political controversies
Belgium – Belgian political scandals
Canada – List of Canadian political scandals
Chile – Chilean political scandals
Colombia – Colombian parapolitics scandal
France – French political scandals
Germany – German political scandals
Iceland – Icelandic political scandals
India – Indian political scandals
Ireland – Irish political scandals
Italy – Italian political scandals
Japan – Black Mist Scandal (Japanese politics)
Lithuania – Generic article on corruption in Lithuania
New Zealand – List of political scandals in New Zealand
Philippines – List of political scandals in the Philippines
Poland - List of political scandals in Poland
Slovakia – List of Slovak political scandals
Slovenia – 1975 Zaliv Scandal
United Kingdom – List of political scandals in the United Kingdom
United States  – List of federal political scandals in the United States
Ukraine – List of political scandals in Ukraine


== See also ==
Deviancy amplification spiral
Mass media
Moral panic
Sensationalism
Sex scandal


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Canel, Maria Jose and Karen Sanders. Morality Tales: Political Scandals and Journalism in Britain and Spain in the 1990s (2005)
Dagnes, Alison and Mark Sachleben. "Scandal! An Interdisciplinary Approach to the Consequences, Outcomes, and Significance of Political Scandals" (Bloomsbury 2013)
Fisher, Trevor. Scandal: Sexual Politics of Late Victorian Britain (1995)
Giroux, Gary. Business Scandals, Corruption, and Reform: An Encyclopedia (2013)
Grossman, Mark. Political Corruption in America: An Encyclopedia of Scandals, Power, and Greed (2008)
Heidenheimer, Arnold and M. Johnston. Political corruption: Concepts and contexts (2002)
King, Anthony. Sex, Money and Power: Political Scandals in Great Britain and the United States (1984)
Kohn, George C. The New Encyclopedia of American Scandal (2000)
MacMullen, Ramsay. Corruption and the Decline of Rome (1990)
Scott, James C. Comparative political corruption (1972)
Temple, Kathryn. Scandal Nation: Law and Authorship in Britain, 1750–1832 (2002)


== External links ==
 Media related to Political scandals at Wikimedia Commons