Policy studies is a subdisicipline of political science that includes the analysis of the process of policymaking (the policy process) and the contents of policy (policy analysis). Policy analysis includes substantive area research (such as health or education policy), program evaluation and impact studies, and policy design. It "involves systematically studying the nature, causes, and effects of alternative public policies, with particular emphasis on determining the policies that will achieve given goals." It emerged in the United States in the 1960s and 1970s.
Policy Studies also examines the conflicts and conflict resolution that arise from the making of policies in civil society, the private sector, or more commonly, in the public sector (e.g. government).
It frequently focuses on the public sector but is equally applicable to other kinds of organizations (e.g., the not-for-profit sector).  Some policy study experts graduate from public policy schools with public policy degrees. Alternatively, experts may have backgrounds in policy analysis, program evaluation, sociology, psychology, philosophy, economics, anthropology, geography, law, political science, social work, environmental planning and public administration.
Traditionally, the field of policy studies focused on domestic policy, with the notable exceptions of foreign and defense policies. However, the wave of economic globalization, which ensued in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, created a need for a subset of policy studies that focuses on global governance, especially as it relates to issues that transcend national borders such as climate change, terrorism, nuclear proliferation, and economic development. This subset of policy studies, which is often referred to as international policy studies, typically requires mastery of a second language and attention to cross-cultural issues in order to address national and cultural biases. For example, the Monterey Institute of International Studies at Middlebury College offers Master of Arts programs that focus exclusively on international policy through a mix of interdisciplinary and cross-cultural analysis called the "Monterey Way". Examples of academic programs in policy studies include the Harvard Kennedy School and the LBJ School of Public Affairs.


== See also ==
Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management
Public policy
Public policy schools
Public administration
Public policy of the United States


== References ==


== External links ==
General The dictionary definition of policy at Wiktionary
Policy Studies OrganizationJournals of the Policy Studies OrganizationAsian Politics & Policy
Digest of Middle East Studies 
Latin American Policy
Policy Studies Journal
Politics & Policy
Review of Policy Research
Policy & Internet
Poverty & Public Policy
Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy
World Medical & Health PolicyOtherVisualization of the policy cycle
National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration
Decision Theater - Helping policy makers in their decision making process through the use of visualization, simulation and collaboration tools.
AARP Public Policy Institute (United States)
The Hoover Digest
Global Public Policy Institute