Quadratic voting (sometimes abbreviated QV) is a collective decision-making procedure where participants express how strongly they feel about an issue rather than just whether they are in favor of it or opposed to it. It addresses issues of voting paradox and majority-rule. According to its creators, Steven P. Lalley and E. Glen Weyl, Quadratic voting achieves the greatest possible good for the greatest number of group members, although other proponents of Quadratic voting state that this is only true approximately.


== Concept ==
Quadratic voting is based on market principles. Each voter is endowed with a budget of “vote credits” that they may spend to influence the outcome of a range of decisions. If a participant has a strong preference for or against a particular decision, additional votes can be allocated. A vote pricing rule determines the cost of additional votes, with each vote becoming increasingly more expensive.
The quadratic nature of the voting means that a voter can use their votes more efficiently by spreading them across many issues. For example, a voter with a budget of 16 vote credits can apply 1 vote credit to each of 16 issues. However, if they feel strongly about a single issue, they might apply 4 votes, at the cost of 16 credits, to a single issue, using their entire budget. 
The quadratic nature of voting means that there is a large incentive to buy and sell votes, or to trade votes. But using a totally secret ballot gives some protection against vote buying or trading because such exchanges cannot be verified by the buyer or trader.


== Applications ==
Quadratic Voting was used in an experiment by the Democratic caucus of the Colorado House of Representatives in the Spring of 2019. Lawmakers used it to decide on their legislative priorities for the coming two years, selecting among 107 possible bills. Each member was given 100 virtual tokens that would allow them to put either 9 votes on one bill (as 81 virtual tokens represented 9 votes for one bill) and 3 votes on another bill or 5 votes each (25 virtual tokens) on 4 different bills. In the end, the winner was Senate Bill 85, the Equal Pay for Equal Work Act, with a total of 60 votes. Through the Quadratic Voting System, it was much easier to detect a difference in opinions as the number of votes varied drastically from bill to bill.


== See also ==
Penrose method


== References ==


== Further reading ==
US Patent 9754272, E Glen Weyl; David Quarfoot & Eric Posner et al., "System and Method for Quadratic, Near-Quadratic, and Convex Voting in Various Types of Research and Voting", issued 5 September 2017