The Quebec ban on religious symbols was enacted by Bill 21, "An Act respecting the laicity of the State" (French: Loi sur la laïcité de l'État), which was tabled by the ruling Coalition Avenir Québec (CAQ) on March 29, 2019. Since it was passed, new hires among public workers in positions of coercive authority have been banned from wearing religious symbols. It also mandates having one's face uncovered to give or receive specific public services.


== Background ==
As promised during the 2018 election campaign, the CAQ government tabled Bill 21 on March 28, 2019, entitled "An Act respecting the laicity of the State". The bill, since made law, bans public workers in positions of "authority" from wearing religious symbols, specifically while they are on duty. According to the text of the bill, the laicity of the state is defined by a neutral religious stance, keeping state and religious affairs apart, as well as promoting equality and freedom of conscience and religion among citizens.Immigration Minister Simon Jolin-Barrette said all religious symbols, regardless of the size of the object, would be prohibited, but not religious tattoos or hairstyles such as Rastafarian dreadlocks. The law affects:

Any public employee who carries a weapon, including police officers, courthouse constables, bodyguards, prison guards, and wildlife officers
Crown prosecutors, government lawyers, and judges
School principals, vice-principals and teachersA grandfather clause exempts some public workers as long as they continue to hold the same job, at the same institution. The law also details rules that require people to uncover their faces to receive a public service for identification or security purposes, such as taking public transit with a reduced-fare photo ID  card. However, people who have their faces covered for medical reasons or to do their jobs are exempt from these rules.The previous Liberal government passed a similar law banning veils that cover the face, but the relevant sections remain suspended following a court challenge by civil liberties groups. Before that legislation, the Parti Québécois proposed a law banning the display of "ostentatious" religious symbols, but they were unable to pass it before losing an election some months thereafter.
Under the CAQ's legislation, the law applies when receiving government services, including:

Municipal services such as public transit
Doctors, dentists, and midwives in public institutions
Subsidized daycares
School boardsThe law invokes the Notwithstanding clause to avoid legal challenge based on the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, and amends the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms to say that "state laicity" is of "fundamental importance" to avoid lawsuits under Quebec law.


== Passage ==
Bill 21 at third reading had a closure motion to cut off debate at the committee stage passed by the majority CAQ members of the assembly. Debate and vote were scheduled for June 16, 2019, and passed as expected.
The Bill passed on 17 June with CAQ government forcing passage of the law by a 73–35 vote, with backing of the Parti Québécois, and the Liberals and Quebec solidaire were opposed. The CAQ government also introduced last-minute amendments toughening the law, making provisions for a minister to verify that it is being obeyed and to demand corrective measures if necessary.


== Reactions ==
The Quebec Liberal Party said the law would go too far, particularly in respect to Muslim women, and continued to advocate a ban only on religious clothing which covered the face, such as the niqab. Québec solidaire said that it was opposed to any ban on the wearing of religious symbols. The Parti Québécois said the ban did not go far enough, and that it should have been extended to public daycare workers, as in its proposed legislation.The National Council of Canadian Muslims (NCCM) and the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) filed a legal challenge against the law which aims to stay its application. The groups argue that the law is unconstitutional, irreparably harms religious minorities and constitutes "state-sanctioned second class citizenship."The Quebec Court of Appeal later granted the petitioning organizations leave to appeal the claim for an injunction.


== See also ==
Quebec Charter of Values
Quebec ban on face covering
French ban on face covering
Hijab by country#Canada
Islam in Canada


== References ==