The propaganda tactic of "red-tagging" in the Philippines has often been directed towards individuals and organizations critical of the Philippine government,  who are labeled “communist” or “terrorist” regardless of their actual beliefs or affiliations.Filipino journalists also sometimes call the practice "red-baiting," although in other countries, that term can also refer to a rhetorical technique, separately from the propaganda practice.
Although the Philippines is a constitutional democracy where beliefs and political expressions are supposed to be protected, red-tagging has had a long history in the country, and cause oriented groups including the United Nations Amnesty International, and Human Rights Watch warn that the use of red-tagging as a political tactic continues to undermine Philippine democracy by stifling dissent, encouraging authoritarian practices, and generally having a chilling effect on discourse and debate.The Philippine independent news organization Vera Files notes that because President Rodrigo Duterte declared the CPP-NPA a terrorist organization under the Philippines Human Security Act of 2007 (Republic Act 9372) in 2017, individuals and organizations who have been red-tagged are vulnerable to inteception and recording of communiction, detention without charges, restricted travel and personal liberties, examination of bank records, and the seizure and sequestaration of their assets.  Reporters Without Borders notes that red-tagged individuals are vulnerable to death threats and violence.The Philippines does have an armed conflict with the New People’s Army, which the Armed Forces of the Philippines estimated to have 4,200 fighters in an interview with Forbes Magazine in March 2017. But organizations frequently subject to “red-tagging” in the Philippines include human rights organizations, church or religious groups, health worker unions, the academe,  , and the mainstream media.


== Definitions ==
Commonly defined as the harassment or persecution of a person because of “known or suspected communist sympathies,” the extensive history of red-tagging in the Philippines has led to the recognition of several formal definitions buy the Philippine Government.

The Philippines' Commission on Human Rights follows the definition laid down by the International Peace Observers Network (IPON), which defines it as:“An act of State actors, particularly law enforcement agencies, to publicly brand individuals, groups, or institutions as...affiliated to communist or leftist terrorists.”  
Additionally, the term has been defined in Philippine Jurisprudence through the dissenting opinion of Supreme Court Associate Justice Marvic Leonen in the 2105 court case Zarate vs. Aquino III (G.R. No. 220028 J. Leonen Dissenting Opinion, Nov. 10, 2015), in which Leonen adopted a 2011 journals’ definition of red-tagging:“the act of labelling, branding, naming and accusing individuals and/ or organizations of being left-leaning, subversives, communists or terrorists (used as) a strategy...by State agents, particularly law enforcement agencies and the military, against those perceived to be ‘threats’ or ‘enemies of the State’.”


== Red-tagging of specific groups ==


=== Red-tagging of Human Rights Organizations and Advocates ===
Human rights advocates and human rights rights organizations in the Philippines, whether civil society, intergovernment, and even governmental in nature, have often been the subject of “defamatory and intimidating public statements”  as a result of their “human rights monitoring work."In 2018, for example, a United Nations Human Rights Council report counted “at least 80 recognized human rights defenders, indigenous peoples’ representatives, and representatives of community-based organizations,” which the Administration of President Rodrigo Duterte had labeled as terrorists in connection with their work, some of which was part of their "cooperation with the United Nations.”  This included UN Special Rapporteur Victoria Tauli-Corpuz, who was wrongly  listed as a senior member of the NPA In August 2019, Brandon Lee an American paralegal who volunteers for human rights organizations Ifugao Peasant Movement (IPM) and the Cordillera Human Rights Alliance (CHRA), was shot four times outside his home in Ifugao province, putting him in a coma.  Since 2015, posters claiming Lee and other IPM members as "enemies of the state" and members of the New People's army had been circulating in the province.  Lee and the IPM had denied the allegations, and had continued their volunteer work in Ifugao province despite death threats.The Philippines' own Commission on Human Rights, a constitutional commission independent of the three other branches of the Philippine government, mandated to monitor human rights abuses by state actors, has itself sometimes been threatened or vilified for conducting its investigations.


== Media coverage ==
While there is some coverage of red-tagging as a practice in Filipino mainstream news coverage, media watchgroups such as the Center for Media Freedom and Responsibility have noted that this is typically limited to reportage regarding the statements of the groups involved, and few news outlets add "the necessary explanation why the profiling of the two organizations is dangerous."  In a January 2019 statement, they said:  "Dissent is essential to a working democracy. The independent press has to remind its audience of that fact as attempts to discredit various groups critical of the current regime continue, rather than just report statements of public officials condemning the politics of the Left and publicly naming those they see as 'Red.'"


== See also ==
Constitution of the Philippines


== References ==