The Southern Agrarians (also the Twelve Southerners, the Vanderbilt Agrarians, the Nashville Agrarians, the Tennessee Agrarians, and the Fugitive Agrarians) were a group of twelve American writers, poets, essayists, and novelists, all with roots in the Southern United States, who united to write a pro–Southern agrarian manifesto, published as the essay collection I’ll Take My Stand: The South and the Agrarian Tradition (1930).  The Southern Agrarians greatly contributed to the Southern Renaissance, the revival of Southern literature in the 1920s and 1930s, and were based at Vanderbilt University, in Nashville, with John Crowe Ransom as the unofficial leader.


== Members ==
The Southern Agrarians included:

Donald Davidson, poet, essayist, reviewer and historian
John Gould Fletcher, poet and historian
Henry Blue Kline
Lyle H. Lanier
Andrew Nelson Lytle, poet, novelist and essayist
Herman Clarence Nixon
Frank Lawrence Owsley, historian
John Crowe Ransom, poet, professor, essayist
Allen Tate, poet
John Donald Wade, biographer and essayist
Robert Penn Warren, poet, novelist, essayist and critic, later first poet laureate of the United States
Stark Young, novelist, drama and literary critic, playwright


== Background and general ideas of the Southern Agrarians ==
The Agrarians were offended by H. L. Mencken's  attacks on aspects of Southern culture that they valued, such as its agrarianism, conservatism, and religiosity. They sought to confront the widespread and rapidly increasing effects of modernity, urbanism, and industrialism on American (but especially Southern) culture and tradition. The informal leader of the Fugitives and the Agrarians was John Crowe Ransom, but in a 1945 essay, he announced that he no longer believed in either the possibility or the desirability of an Agrarian restoration, which he declared a "fantasy".


== Criticized as reactionary ==
I'll Take My Stand was criticized at the time, and since, as a reactionary and romanticized defense of the Old South and the Lost Cause of the Confederacy. It ignored slavery and denounced "progress", for example, and some critics considered it to be moved by nostalgia.In the 1930s, the Agrarians were challenged by the modernizing social scientists (the "Chapel Hill Sociologists") based at the University of North Carolina (in Chapel Hill) and led by Howard W. Odum, on issues of urbanism, social progress, and the very nature and definition of the South. The sociologists produced Rupert Vance's The Human Geography of the South (1932), and Odum's Southern Regions of the United States (1936), as well as numerous articles in the journal Social Forces.  The sociologists argued that the problems in the South stemmed from traditionalism which ought to and could be cured by modernization, the opposite of the Agrarian viewpoint.


== Revival ==
At a reunion of the Fugitive Poets in 1956, Warren confessed that for about a decade — from just before World War II to some years after — he had shut Agrarianism from his mind as irrelevant to the cataclysmic social and political events then playing out in the world.  Now, however, he believed that, rather than being irrelevant, his old Agrarian enthusiasms were tied into the major problems of the age.  In the modern world, the individual had been marginalized, stripped of any sense of responsibility, or of past or place.  "In this context," writes Paul V. Murphy, "the Agrarian image of a better antebellum South came to represent for Warren a potential source of spiritual revitalization.  The past recalled, not as a mythical 'golden age' but 'imaginatively conceived and historically conceived in the strictest readings of the researchers', could be a 'rebuke to the present'."It was Warren's concern with democracy, regionalism, personal liberty and individual responsibility that led him to support the civil rights movement, which he depicted in his nonfiction works Segregation (1956) and Who Speaks for the Negro? (1965) as a struggle for identity and individualism.  As Hugh Ruppersburg, among others, has argued, Warren's support for the civil rights movement paradoxically stemmed from Agrarianism, which by the 1950s, meant for him something very different from the Agrarianism of I'll Take My Stand.  As Warren's political and social views evolved, his notion of Agrarianism evolved with them.  He came to support more progressive ideas and racial integration and was a close friend of the eminent African-American author Ralph Ellison.  While Donald Davidson took a leading role in the attempt to preserve the system of segregation, Warren took his stand against it.  As Paul V. Murphy writes, "Loyalty to the southern past and the ambiguous lessons of Agrarianism led both men in very different directions."


== Conservatives ==
In recent decades, some traditionalistic conservatives such as Allan C. Carlson, Joseph Scotchie, and Eugene Genovese have praised the Agrarian themes in light of what they see as the failures of highly urbanized and industrialized modern societies.Today, the Southern Agrarians are regularly lauded in the conservative media such as the Southern Partisan.  Some of their social, economic, and political ideas have been refined and updated by writers such as Allan C. Carlson and Wendell Berry.  The Intercollegiate Studies Institute has published books which further explore the ideas of the Agrarians.


== Statement of Principles ==
A key quote from the "Introduction: A Statement of Principles" to their 1930 book I'll Take My Stand: The South and the Agrarian Tradition:

All the articles bear in the same sense upon the book's title-subject: all tend to support a Southern way of life against what may be called the American or prevailing way; and all as much as agree that the best terms in which to represent the distinction are contained in the phrase, Agrarian versus Industrial.  ...Opposed to the industrial society is the agrarian, which does not stand in particular need of definition. An agrarian society is hardly one that has no use at all for industries, for professional vocations, for scholars and artists, and for the life of cities. Technically, perhaps, an agrarian society is one in which agriculture is the leading vocation, whether for wealth, for pleasure, or for prestige – a form of labor that is pursued with intelligence and leisure, and that becomes the model to which the other forms approach as well as they may. But an agrarian regime will be secured readily enough where the superfluous industries are not allowed to rise against it. The theory of agrarianism is that the culture of the soil is the best and most sensitive of vocations, and that therefore it should have the economic preference and enlist the maximum number of workers."


== See also ==
Agrarianism
Tennessee literature


== References ==


== Bibliography ==
Davidson, Donald; Fletcher, John Gould; Kline, Henry Blue; Lanier, Lyle H; Lytle, Andrew Nelson; Nixon, Herman Clarence; Owsley, Frank Lawrence; Ransom, John Crowe; Tate, Allen; Wade, John Donald; Warren, Robert Penn; Young, Stark (2006), I'll Take My Stand: The South and the Agrarian Tradition (75th anniversary ed.), Louisiana State Univ. Press, ISBN 0-8071-3208-X.
———; Fletcher, John Gould; Kline, Henry Blue; Lanier, Lyle H; Lytle, Andrew Nelson; Nixon, Herman Clarence; Owsley, Frank Lawrence; Ransom, John Crowe; Tate, Allen; Wade, John Donald; Warren, Robert Penn; Young, Stark (1930), "Introduction: a statement of principles", I'll Take My Stand.


== Further reading ==
Bingham, Emily; Underwood, Thomas A, eds. (2001), The Southern Agrarians and the New Deal: Essays After I'll Take My Stand.
Carlson, Allan (2004), The New Agrarian Mind: The Movement Toward Decentralist Thought in Twentieth-Century America.
Langdale, John (2012), Superfluous Southerners: Cultural Conservatism and the South, 1920–1990.
Murphy, Paul V (2001), The Rebuke of History: The Southern Agrarians and American Conservative Thought.
Scotchie, Joseph, "Agrarian Valhalla: The Vanderbilt 12 and Beyond", Southern Events, archived from the original on 2006-12-29.