The House of Assembly (official constitutional name: Maneaba ni Maungatabu or "supreme maneaba")  of Kiribati has 46 members, 44 elected for a four-year term in single-seat and multi-seat constituencies, 1 delegate from Banaba Island and 1 ex officio member (the Attorney General).
Created by the Constitution of 12 July 1979, its seat has been at Ambo on South Tarawa since October 2000. From 1979 to 2000, it was at Bairiki.
The current Kiribati Electoral Commissioner is Rine Ueara. Kiribati's voters last went to the polls on 30 December 2015 (and 7 January for the second round) to elect 44 MPs in 23 electoral districts.The House of Assembly has a Speaker, elected by its members from outside Parliament, per article 71 of the Constitution.


== Speakers ==
At the first session following a general election, the Chief Justice presides over the House of Assembly to take nominations for Speaker. Voting is done by secret ballot, and a candidate must receive an absolute majority of votes cast to be elected. Should more than two candidates be nominated, the candidate with the lowest number of votes is eliminated after each round of voting until one candidate wins.The Speaker of the House of Assembly is elected from outside the legislature and does not have a vote on any matter. Should a vote result in a tie, the Speaker has to declare it as rejected.Following the dissolution of the legislature before elections, the Speaker remains in office. On the first day of a new session, the Speaker leaves office. The Maneaba may also pass a no-confidence vote against the Speaker to remove him from office.Along with the Chief Justice and Chairman of the Public Service Commission, the Speaker serves as a member of the Council of State, formed to continue carrying out the duties of government following a no-confidence vote against the President or Government.


== Last election results ==


== See also ==
Politics of Kiribati
List of legislatures by country


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website