The Moral Case for Fossil Fuels is a 2014 book by American energy theorist Alex Epstein, in which the author argues that, although sometimes labeled as "immoral," the use of fossil fuels dramatically improves the overall progress of humanity, and improves life expectancy and income. The book was a New York Times and Wall Street Journal bestseller.


== Overview ==
The Moral Case for Fossil Fuels outlines the benefits that the development of coal, oil, and natural gas have had on mankind, including improved health, increased lifespan, and expansion of material welfare.The book also covers the topics of climate livability, the effects of carbon emissions, the nature of the environmental movement, and the role fossil fuels play in everyday life. Epstein writes that alternative energy sources like wind, solar, and biofuels are inferior to fossil fuels because they are more expensive and less reliable. He also examines trends in storm energy, global temperatures, and sea level changes and concludes that any changes are minor and do not justify alarmist predictions.


== Reception ==
Positive reviews of the book were published by The Wall Street Journal, Barron's, National Review, Reason,  The Washington Free Beacon, and The Morning Sun. Several blogs also featured positive reviews, including those of the Independent Institute and The Heartland Institute, two conservative think tanks.
Critical reviews were published by Inside Higher Ed, The Huffington Post, The Guardian, and Our World, a publication of the United Nations University. Jason Wilson of The Guardian alleged that Epstein has a close association with conservative advocacy groups and receives funding from the Koch brothers and that "Epstein's work has been popular and influential on the right because it is a particularly fluent, elaborate form of climate denialism."In 2014, Epstein was interviewed by Peter Thiel at an event hosted by the energy startup Tachyus. Thiel also provided a blurb for the book.In December 2014, political commentator John McLaughlin called Epstein "most original thinker of the year" for his book during McLaughlin's yearly The McLaughlin Group roundup.


== References ==