Tyne and Wear () is a metropolitan county in the North East region of England around the mouths of the rivers Tyne and Wear. It came into existence in 1974 after the passage of the Local Government Act 1972.  It consists of the five metropolitan boroughs of South Tyneside, North Tyneside, City of Newcastle upon Tyne, Gateshead and City of Sunderland. It is bounded on the east by the North Sea, and has borders with Northumberland to the north and County Durham to the south.
Prior to the 1974 reforms, the territory now covered by the county of Tyne and Wear straddled the border between the counties of Northumberland and Durham, the border being marked by the river Tyne; that territory also included five county boroughs.
Tyne and Wear County Council, based at Sandyford House, was abolished in 1986, and so its districts (the metropolitan boroughs) are now unitary authorities.  However, the metropolitan county continues to exist in law and as a geographic frame of reference, and as a ceremonial county.


== History ==
The Local Government Act 1888 constituted Newcastle upon Tyne, Gateshead and Sunderland as county boroughs (Newcastle had "county corporate" status as the "County and Town of Newcastle upon Tyne" since 1400).  Tynemouth joined them in 1904.  Between the county boroughs, various other settlements also formed part of the administrative counties of Durham and of Northumberland.
The need to reform local government on Tyneside was recognised by the government as early as 1935, when a Royal Commission to Investigate the Conditions of Local Government on Tyneside was appointed. The three commissioners were to

examine the system of local government in the areas of local government north and south of the river Tyne from the sea to the boundary of the Rural District of Castle Ward and Hexham in the County of Northumberland and to the Western boundary of the County of Durham, to consider what changes, if any, should be made in the existing arrangements with a view to securing greater economy and efficiency, and to make recommendations.

The report of the Royal Commission, published in 1937, recommended the establishment of a Regional Council for Northumberland and Tyneside (to be called the "Northumberland Regional Council") to administer services that needed to be exercised over a wide area, with a second tier of smaller units for other local-government purposes. The second-tier units would form by amalgamating the various existing boroughs and districts. The county boroughs in the area would lose their status.  Within this area, a single municipality would be formed covering the four county boroughs of Newcastle, Gateshead, Tynemouth, South Shields and other urban districts and boroughs.A minority report proposed amalgamation of Newcastle, Gateshead, Wallsend, Jarrow, Felling, Gosforth, Hebburn and Newburn into a single "county borough of Newcastle-on-Tyneside".  The 1937 proposals never came into operation: local authorities could not agree on a scheme and the legislation of the time did not allow central government to compel one.Tyneside (excluding Sunderland) was a Special Review Area under the Local Government Act 1958.  The Local Government Commission for England came back with a recommendation to create a new county of Tyneside based on the review area, divided into four separate boroughs.  This was not implemented.  The Redcliffe-Maud Report proposed a Tyneside unitary authority, again excluding Sunderland, which would have set up a separate East Durham unitary authority.
The White Paper that led to the Local Government Act 1972 proposed as "area 2" a metropolitan county including Newcastle and Sunderland, extending as far south down the coast as Seaham and Easington, and bordering "area 4" (which would become Cleveland).  The Bill as presented in November 1971 pruned back the southern edge of the area, and gave it the name "Tyneside".  The name "Tyneside" proved controversial on Wearside, and a government amendment changed the name to "Tyne and Wear" at the request of Sunderland County Borough Council.


== Local government ==
Although Tyne and Wear County Council was abolished in 1986, several joint bodies exist to run certain services on a county-wide basis. Most notable is the Tyne and Wear Passenger Transport Authority, which co-ordinates transport policy. Through its passenger transport executive, known as Nexus, it owns and operates the Tyne and Wear Metro light rail system, and the Shields ferry service and the Tyne Tunnel, linking communities on either side of the River Tyne. Also through Nexus, the authority subsidises socially necessary transport services (including taxis) and operates a concessionary fares scheme for the elderly and disabled.  Nexus has been an executive body of the North East Joint Transport Committee since November 2018.
Other joint bodies include the Tyne and Wear Fire and Rescue Service and Tyne & Wear Archives & Museums, which was created from the merger of the Tyne and Wear Archives Service and Tyne and Wear Museums. These joint bodies are administered by representatives of all five of the constituent councils. In addition the Northumbria Police force covers Northumberland and Tyne and Wear.


== Climate and environment ==
Tyne and Wear either has or closely borders two official Met Office stations, neither located in one of the major urban centres. The locations for those are in marine Tynemouth where Tyne meets the North Sea east of Newcastle and inland Durham in County Durham around 20 kilometres (12 mi) south-west of Sunderland. There are some clear differences between the stations temperature and precipitation patterns even though both have a cool-summer and mild-winter oceanic climate.


=== Green belt ===

Tyne and Wear contains green belt interspersed throughout the county, mainly on the fringes of the Tyneside/Wearside conurbation. There is also an inter-urban line of belt helping to keep the districts of South Tyneside, Gateshead, and Sunderland separated. It was first drawn up from the 1950s. All the county's districts contain some portion of belt.


== Politics ==

Tyne and Wear is divided into 13 Parliamentary constituencies. Historically, the area has been a Labour stronghold; South Shields is the only Parliamentary constituency that has never returned a Conservative Member of Parliament (MP) to the House of Commons since the Reform Act of 1832.

At the level of local government, all of the region's five unitary authorities were controlled by Labour in 2019.
Newcastle and Sunderland are known for declaring their election results early on election night. Therefore they frequently give the first indication of nationwide trends. An example of this was at the 2016 European Union referendum. Newcastle was the first large city to declare, and 50.6% of voters voted to Remain; this proportion was far lower than predicted by experts. Sunderland declared soon after and gave a 62% vote to Leave, much higher than expected. These two results were seen as an early sign that the United Kingdom had voted to Leave.


== Settlements ==

Italics indicate the district centre.
For a complete list of all villages, towns and cities see the list of places in Tyne and Wear.


== Places of interest ==
Gateshead
Angel of the North
Beamish Museum, which straddles the Gateshead/County Durham boundary
BALTIC Centre for Contemporary Art
Dunston Staithes
Gateshead International Stadium
Gateshead Millennium Bridge
Gibside
MetroCentre
Saltwell Park
Shipley Art Gallery
Tanfield Railway, Sunniside (crosses boundary into County Durham)
The Sage Gateshead
Tyne Bridge (Shared with Newcastle upon Tyne)
Newcastle upon Tyne
Discovery Museum (previously Museum of Science & Engineering)
Hadrian's Wall
Hancock Museum
Jesmond Dene public park
Newcastle Castle Keep
St James' Park
Leazes Park
Centre for Life
Town Moor
Tyneside cinema
Chinatown, Newcastle
Quayside
Metro Radio Arena
Laing Art Gallery
Theatre Royal
Northumberland Street
Grey Street
Grey's Monument
The Biscuit Factory
Tyne Bridge (Shared with Gateshead)
North Tyneside
Segedunum Roman Fort & Museum, Wallsend
St Mary's Island bird reserve
Tynemouth Castle
South Tyneside
Arbeia Roman Fort & Museum, South Shields
Marsden Rock bird reserve
Souter Point Lighthouse
Bede's World, Jarrow
Sunderland
The Museum and Winter Gardens
Mowbray Park
Seaburn Beach and Roker Beach
Barnes Park
The National Glass
Hylton Castle
Penshaw Monument
St. Peter's Church
Stadium of Light
The Empire Theatre
Northern Gallery for Contemporary Art


== See also ==

List of Lord Lieutenants of Tyne and Wear
List of High Sheriffs of Tyne and Wear
Tyne–Wear derby


== References ==

http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160113082209/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/geography/beginner-s-guide/glossary/ons-geography-glossary.pdf updated version of the document in the broken link, I assume


== External links ==
Images of Tyne and Wear at the English Heritage Archive
Tyne and Wear at Curlie