Hajjah Zuraida binti Kamaruddin (Jawi: ذورايدا بنت كامروددين; born 14 March 1958) is a Malaysian politician. She is the current Member of Parliament for Ampang and serves in the Cabinet of Malaysia as Minister of Housing and Local Government from 21 May 2018. She is also the Women Chief of People's Justice Party (PKR), a component party of the Pakatan Harapan (PH) ruling coalition in Malaysia.Zuraida was elected to Parliament in the 2008 election, winning the seat of Ampang from the ruling Barisan Nasional coalition. She was reelected in the 2013 and in the .


== Career ==
She started working in the private sector in 1980 at Frank Small & Associates, Australia. She held the position of Qualitative Study Manager before progressing to Chuo Senko Advertising (Japan) as Marketing Research and Account Planning Manager. In addition, she has worked with American International Assurance (AIA), Saatchi & Saatchi Advertising, AVON (M) Berhad and Flaireborne (M) Sdn Bhd.
In 1998, she became a training and motivational consultant to advise organizations such as Petronas, Municipal Council, Oriflame, Nutrimetics, Shinetsu, Texas and marketing, advertising and merchandise research companies.
Other posts include being a member of the Board of Directors of Maahad Tahfiz Az-Zahra, Adviser of ALQAS Education & Charity Home, GEMMA Humanitarian Relief Advisor and Malaysian Student Association in Yemen. She is also a founder and chairwoman of WIRDA having members locally and overseas. WIRDA is a Community Service Center that handles counseling and protection to the needy groups including single mothers, travelers, converts and teens.


== Participation in politics and administration ==
In addition to holding three-term posts as Ampang MP, Selangor, YB Zuraida is also the Women Chief of Pakatan Harapan.
She is also the Chairwoman of the Selangor Women's Institute of IWB (IWB). IWB is a Selangor State Government think tank acting as a policy framework to ensure women's development will take priority in the state.


== International politics ==
As Member of the Parliament and Women Chief of Pakatan Harapan, she is also frequently invited to a symposium and a set of international politicians representing Malaysia. She is also honored to attend and speak at the Women Political Leaders Summit (WPL) in Iceland. WPL is an independent, international and non-profit organization headquartered in Reykjavik, Iceland. Its members are international women leaders such as ministers, members of parliament and community leaders. This organizational activity is more focused on showing the impact of women in global political leadership.
This organization is not only political but also defines the role of women in communication, networks and communities. WPL's main goal is to gather powerful political leaders of women and have the influence to bring positive changes on a global scale.


== Election results ==


== See also ==
Ampang (federal constituency)


== References ==